S. Africa rejects DRC charges 

' ' In fact , the said allegations amount to several accusations , including one that South Africa has supplied arms to the ` ` rebels and aggressors,' ' made by the President of the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) , Mr. Laurent Kabila in an interview last week in Pretoria News .
Without referring specifically to Mr. Kabila 's trenchant criticisms of South Africa 's policy towards the DRC conflict , a statement issued today by the Department of Foreign Affairs ( DFA ) in Pretoria said that South Africa remained committed to ` ` a process that would ensure that the interests of all the Congolese are promoted .
' ' A crucial sentence reads thus : ` ` South Africa supports the perspectives of the Lusaka agreement that the existence of the rebel movements and the non-military opposition groups is a fact in the political dynamics of the DRC and that unless this fact is accepted there will be no progress in the full implementation of the Lusaka ceasefire agreement .
' ' Equally crucial is the reiteration of the South African position that it has ` ` since the Pretoria Declaration of 23 August , 1998 consistently and tirelessly promoted a ceasefire agreement that would call for cessation of hostilities , troop standstill and withdrawal of all foreign troops on DRC soil .
Furthermore , Angola , Namibia and Zimbabwe , which support the DRC government , have done so at a state-to-state level with the legitimate government there , in terms of bi - and multilateral treaty obligations , the latter as members under the charter of the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) .
However , although Angola and Zimbabwe had begun to extend help to the DRC government to repel the ` ` rebels and aggressors,' ' notably absent from the talks were not only the DRC President , Mr. Kabila , surely central to any initiative pertinent to the issue , but also Mr. Robert Mugabe , President of Zimbabwe and Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos , President of Angola .
