Reflections on the Kerala model 

In more recent decades , the East Asian ` ` miracle' ' economies are said to have added a critical new dimension of human resource development to the process even though the first round of applause for these newly industrialising economies in the West ( and in IMF-World Bank circles ) was evoked by their demonstrating , after the fashion of Japan , of the ` ` Export-led' ' growth model .
Nearer home , within India , over the last twenty years , a unique if somewhat undramatic developmental model has been at work in Kerala even if seeming paradoxes have caught the attention of analysts and unabashed detractors more than the positive transformational value which the process has already imparted to millions of people in the State .
The contradictions between high literacy and low employment opportunities within the State are as much due to the mismatch between the educational curriculum and the occupational profile of the economy as it is due to the constraints of the State with regard to the whole gamut of requisites for rapid expansion - infrastructure , technology absorption , investment climate and so forth .
Notwithstanding such comments on the lopsidedness of the so- called Kerala model ( which could have proved disastrous but for the emigration of over one million workers to the Gulf countries , other foreign lands and other States in India ) , the fact remains that the State has proved that in real terms of development ( of human resources ) , it has set up standards worthy of emulation by other countries leave alone other States in India .
I . S. Gulati , the renowned fiscal economist , who has been steering the State 's Planning Board with such singular clarity of mission , describes the key principle of decentralisation as ` ` an article of faith' ' much more than a constitutional mandate and attributes the pursuit of this objective in the State to the vision , farsightedness and democratic commitment of the late E. M. S . Namboodripad .
A State where about 37 per cent of Plan resources are transferred to local bodies on the two criteria of population and backwardness has obviously been able to tap people 's energies much more effectively while other States have been wallowing in arid debates about how much to decentralise and through what modalities with political parties unwilling to see development as nothing different from a ` ` sharing of spoils' ' among themselves .
