
Nigeria shares India's concern on terrorism


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 25. Nigeria today said it shared India's  concern 
over cross-border terrorism and said it would cooperate with  New 
Delhi in articulating these concerns at all international fora.

In  his hour-long interaction with the Prime Minister,  Mr.  Atal 
Behari  Vajpayee, the visiting Nigerian President,  Mr.  Olusegun 
Obasanjo,  sought  closer  political  dialogue  between  the  two 
countries  since both were members of the U.N., the  Commonwealth 
and  other  international  fora. In this context,  he  felt  both 
countries should articulate their concerns about organised crime, 
including  terrorism, both domestic and international,  at  these 
bodies.

Mr. Obasanjo made similar observations earlier in the day when he 
was  accorded  a  ceremonial  welcome in  the  forecourt  of  the 
Rashtrapati  Bhavan  where  he  was  formally  received  by   the 
President,  Mr.  K.  R. Narayanan,  Mr.  Vajpayee,  the  External 
Affairs  Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, other Cabinet  Members  and  
senior officials. 

``Internal   or  international  terrorism  should   be   strongly 
condemned,''  he  told newsmen after  the  ceremonial  reception. 
Nigeria, he said, was attaching priority to the struggle  against 
corruption  and  organised  crime  and  creation  of  the   right 
atmosphere for investment.

The ministerial meeting with Mr. Vajpayee was preceded by a  one-
to-one  meeting  without aides between the two  leaders,  said  a 
Foreign Office spokesperson.

The two sides also decided to reactivate the Indo-Nigerian  Joint 
Commission  which has been dormant for a decade due  to  military 
rule  in  this  oil-rich  and  populous  west  African   country. 
Democracy returned to Nigeria less than year ago.  

Mr. Vajpayee told Mr. Obasanjo that Mr. Jaswant Singh would  head 
the Indian delegation to the meeting scheduled to be held in  the 
Nigerian  capital.  The  Foreign  Office  spokesperson  said  Mr. 
Obasanjo  invited  Mr.  Vajpayee to his country  which  was  last 
visited by an Indian premier in 1962.
