
Privatisation of IA begins 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 25. The Government today began the  process  of 
privatising the country's domestic air carrier, Indian  Airlines, 
and  also approved the sale of majority equity stake in a  public 
enterprise,  Modern  Foods India Limited. In the case  of  Indian 
Airlines, it was decided to off-load 51 per cent equity, of which 
26 per cent would be sold to a strategic partner and the  balance 
going to employees, financial institutions and the public. Of the 
ailing  MFIL stock, 74 per cent would be sold to Hindustan  Lever 
Limited.

According  to  an official spokesperson,  the  strategic  partner 
holding  26  per  cent equity in IA would have  a  free  hand  in 
running  the  airline  under  the supervision  of  the  board  of 
directors.  This would be defined in the shareholders'  agreement 
keeping national security and possible emergency requirements  in 
view.  She said the company's disinvestment would be  within  the 
framework  of the domestic air transport policy. In other  words, 
companies  with foreign equity upto 40 per cent would be  allowed 
to bid but those with shareholdings in foreign airlines would not 
be permitted to do so. Foreign firms with NRI equity upto 100 per 
cent can, however, participate in the bidding.

The  sale  of  MFIL  stock, set to yield  Rs.  105.45  crores  in 
revenue, is the culmination of a process begun about 15 years ago 
when  the  Rajiv Gandhi Government selected several  sick  public 
sector  undertakings  for sale to the private  sector.  Political 
compulsions  then  forced the Government to go slow on  the  move 
which  was subsequently revived by every successive regime.  Each 
time  the issue was raised, demands were made to restructure  and 
revive the units rather than sell them. The companies  identified 
for  such sale included Scooters India Limited, the  Tannery  and 
Footwear  Corporation, the National Bicycle Corporation  and  the 
Cycle Corporation of India. 

Ultimately,  the  Disinvestment  Commission  proposed  selling  a 
majority of the shares in MFIL to a strategic partner.  According 
to  today's  decision, two of the seven directors  including  the 
chairman  would  be from the Government, and the rest  from  HLL. 
Restrictions have been imposed on retrenchment of employees  upto 
one  year  after  the sale of equity. Similarly,  any  breach  of 
obligations  relating to employees would invite penal  action  in 
terms  of buying HLL shares at a discount or sale  of  Government 
shares at a premium to the partner. 

An  Inter-Ministerial Group would be constituted to help  in  the 
process of disinvestment for IA.
