
President cautions against social, economic disparities


By Harish Khare

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  25. On the eve of the Golden  Jubilee  of  the 
Indian Republic, the President, Mr. K. R. Narayanan, has exhorted 
the nation to reinforce its democratic spirit, demanded a  better 
deal  for women, and warned against any attempt to roll back  the 
reservation regime for the weaker sections of society.

Introducing an unconventional tone in his traditional address  to 
the nation on the eve of the Republic Day, the President  invited 
the  citizens to undertake an ``honest self- analysis  and  self-
questioning  about  where  we, as a people  and  a  society,  are 
headed?''  The President then proceeded to produce  a  remarkable 
evaluation  of  India's  success  and  failure  in  public  life. 
Perhaps,  never before has an occupant of the Rashtrapati  Bhavan 
spoken with such candour and poignancy about the state of  social 
and political affairs.

In  what  can  be called a gentle rap on  the  knuckles  for  the 
Government,   which  has  been  clamouring  for   reviewing   the 
Constitution, the President saluted the ``far-sighted vision  and 
arduous   labours''  of  the  Constitution's  founding   fathers. 
Reminding  the nation that ``Republic'' means ``supreme power  is 
exercised  not by some remote monarch, but by the  people'',  Mr. 
Narayanan  wanted  the nation to use the occasion of  the  Golden 
Jubilee  to  ``hail that proclamation and  commitment''.  In  two 
paragraphs  the President subtly rebuffed all those who  want  to 
free the ``Executive'' from the rigours of accountability. 

The  President reserved his frankest observations for social  and 
economic disparities. Drawing the country's attention towards the 
phenomenon of ``sullen resentment among the masses against  their 
condition,  erupting often in violent forms in several  parts  of 
the  country'',  Mr.  Narayanan cautioned that  these  voices  of 
resentment should not go unheard.

In  a  candid indictment of the dominant economic  policies,  the 
President noted: ``Violence in society has bared a hundred  fangs 
as  advertisement-driven consumerism is  unleashing  frustrations 
and tensions in our society. The unabashed, vulgar indulgence  in 
conspicuous  consumption  by  the  nouveau  riche  has  left  the 
underclass  seething  in  frustration. One half  of  our  society 
guzzles  aerated  beverages while the other half has to  make  do 
with  palmfuls  of  muddied water. Our  three-way  fast  lane  of 
liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation must provide safe 
pedestrian crossings for the unempowered India also.'' 

While  conceding  that the current ``trajectories of  our  modern 
progress'' cannot be reversed, the President wanted the  energies 
of   civil  society  to  be  mobilised  against  ecological   and 
environmental devastation. The burden has to be shared equally by  
the Government and the people; and, there is a need to  ``improve 
the tone of our social and economic life through an improved work 
ethic and environmental behaviour''.

Continuing his ``honest self-analysis'', Mr. Narayanan  regretted 
that  ``we are becoming increasingly insensitive  and  callous''. 
Cataloging  instances  of insensitivity in our  daily  life,  the 
President  wondered  whether we have become  ``a  stony-  hearted 
society,  not  a  compassionate one  that  produced  the  Buddha, 
Mahavira, Nanak, Kabir and Gandhi''.

According to the President, our ``greatest national drawback'' is 
the  raw deal we give women and ``our greatest  national  shame'' 
remains  the  condition  of the Dalits. The female  half  of  the 
population  ``continues to be regarded as it was in the 18th  and 
19th   centuries''.   More  than  this,   the   President   found 
disconcerting  ``even the absence of political rhetoric on  these 
social  evils''. He noted approvingly that ``it is  against  this 
attitude  of society and the habit of discrimination... that  the 
demand   for   constitutional  reservation  for  women   in   the 
Legislatures and Parliament has become a compelling necessity''.

Coming down severely on the indifference towards the Dalits,  the 
President  noted that ``it seems, in the social realm, some  kind 
of  a  counter-revolution  is taking place in  India''  and  that 
``there  are signs that our privileged classes are getting  tired 
of   the   affirmative  action  provided  by   the   Constitution 
provisions''. 

Throughout  Mr. Narayanan's message one could discern a sense  of 
presidential  obligation  to speak and work for all  sections  of 
society,  and  to  remind the nation that  the  progress  of  the 
republic was a collective endeavor.
