
Padma Vibhushan for R.K. Narayan, Gill 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 25. Eminent writer, Mr. R.K. Narayan, the  Chief 
Election Commissioner, Dr. Manohar Singh Gill, the ISRO Chairman, 
Dr.  K.  Kasturirangan,  noted  Hindustani  classical  musicians, 
Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia, Pandit Jasraj and Ustad Vilayat  Ali 
Khan, were today honoured with the Padma Vibhushan, the  nation's 
second  highest  civilian  award, on the  occasion  of  the  51st 
Republic Day. 

The  senior  BJP leader and former Union Minister,  Mr.  Sikander 
Bakht,  noted economists, Prof. Jagdish Bhagwati and Prof. K.  N. 
Raj,  Swami  Ranganathananda of the Ramakrishna  Mission,  Odissi 
dance exponent, Mr. Kelucharan Mohapatra, the former Reserve Bank 
of India Governor, Mr. M. Narsimham, the former Punjab  Governor, 
Mr.  B.D. Pande, and former civil servants, Mr. Tarlok Singh  and 
Mr.  Krishen  Behari Lall, are among the personalities  who  have 
been honoured with the Padma Vibhushan. 

Padma Bhushan for Rajnikant

The  film  star, Mr. Rajnikant, the  eminent  industrialist,  Mr. 
Ratan Tata, the former Information Adviser to Indira Gandhi,  Mr. 
H.Y.  Sharada Prasad, noted Islamic scholar,  Maulana  Wahiduddin 
Khan,  the  noted scientists, Prof. R.A.  Mashelkar,  Prof.  P.V. 
Indiresan,  Prof. P.C. Sekharan, Dr. Ram Narain Agarwal  and  Dr. 
Vasudev K. Aatre, are among the Padma Bhushan awardees.

The   social  worker,  K.J.  Somaiya,  and  the   scientist,   S. 
Srinivasan, have been bestowed the honour posthumously.

The  husband-wife team of Kuchipudi exponents, Mr. Raja and  Mrs. 
Radha  Reddy,  the  theatre personality, Mr.  Badal  Sircar,  the 
cardiologist, Dr. H.S. Wasir, the social worker, Mr. D. Veerendra 
Heggade,   the   environmentalist,   Mr.   Anil   Agarwal,    the 
archaeologist, Mr. B.B. Lal, the instrumentalist, Ms. Sharan Rani 
Backliwal, the social workers, Mr. V. Swami Kalyan Deo and  Begum 
Kudsia Aizaz Rasul, are among the 21 personalities who have  been 
named for Padma Bhushan awards. 

Padma Shri for A.R. Rahman

The  music  director, Mr. A. R. Rahman, the  film  director,  Mr. 
Shekhar  Kapur, the vocalist, Ms. Shubha Mudgal, the  Hindi  film 
actress,  Ms.  Hema Malini, the film producer and  director,  Mr. 
Ramanand Sagar, figure among the 43 Padma Shri awardees. 

Mr.  N.R. Narayana Murthy of Infosys Technologies and another  IT 
expert,  Dr.  Vijay  Bhatkar, also figure among  the  Padma  Shri 
awardees.  The Padma Shri has also been awarded to noted  theatre 
personality, Mr. Alyque Padamsee, painter, Ms. Anjolie Ela Menon,  
Prof. G. L. Bondarevsky of Russia and Ms. Janaky Athinahappan  of 
Malaysia and S. N. Gourisaria of the U.K. 

PTI reports from Calcutta:

Swami  Ranganathananda,  president of the  Ramakrishna  Math  and 
Ramakrishna Mission, today declined to accept the Padma Vibhushan 
as  it has been awarded to him personally, Mission  sources  said 
here.

The  Swami  had  accepted the Indira Gandhi  Award  for  National 
Integration  in 1987 and the Gandhi Peace Prize in February  last 
year  as both were awarded to the Ramakrishna Mission and not  to 
an individual monk, the sources said. 
