
SC notice to Karnataka CM 


By T. Padmanabha Rao

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 25. The Supreme Court today issued  a  showcause 
`contempt'  notice  to the Karnataka Chief Minister,  Mr.  S.  M. 
Krishna, for certain statements attributed to him on ``the  river 
Krishna  water dispute - Alamatti dam matter'' in a  news  report 
published on January 24 in an English daily.

The  Bench  directed Mr. Krishna to be present in  the  court  on 
February 8.

The Bench said that if the news report was true, it fell foul  of 
the court's ``restraint order'' on January 19 (in connection with 
the  hearing of the `Krishna water dispute cases') and  it  prima 
facie amounted to contempt of this court.

The  Bench,  on January 19, directed that none of  the  concerned 
parties  -  Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and  Union  of 
India - shall go to the Press or take recourse to any other media 
on  the merits of their respective cases during the  pendency  of 
the proceedings before the apex court.

Later, when Mr. F. S. Nariman, counsel, pleaded that the  court's 
order  be  suspended for the time being as it appeared  that  Mr. 
Krishna replied to a question on a related issue in a ``meet  the 
Press programme'', the Bench said it had issued only a  showcause 
notice to him (to appear and explain his stand).

The  Bench today began hearing the resumed arguments from Mr.  F. 
S.  Nariman, senior counsel for Karnataka, on its  original  suit 
which  inter  alia requested the court to direct  the  Centre  to 
notify  `Scheme B' - surplus water - framed by the Krishna  Water 
Dispute  Tribunal  and make provision for  establishment  of  the 
Krishna Valley Authority and for implementation of the Tribunal's 
directions  in its 1973 report and 1976 Report,  as  contemplated 
under Section 6(A) of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act.

Karnataka's suit urged the court to restrain Andhra Pradesh  from 
executing  certain  specified projects such as the  Telugu  Ganga 
till Scheme B framed by the Tribunal was duly and effectively put 
into operation.

UNI reports from Bangalore:

Mr. Krishna said he would go by the advise of Mr. F. S.  Nariman, 
counsel,  with  regard  to the showcause  notice  issued  by  the 
Supreme Court.
