
Wranglings, scuffle in NDA 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 25. The seat-sharing agreement among partners  of 
the National Democratic Alliance for the Bihar Assembly elections 
is  threatening to fall apart with the parties unable  to  divide 
between  themselves even the 108 seats which go to polls  in  the 
first  phase  on  February 12. The last  day  for  withdrawal  of 
nominations for these seats is January 27.

Till  last night, the progress in the talks to decide on the  108 
seats,  which  was  held at the residence of  the  Union  Finance 
Minister,  Mr.  Yashwant Sinha, was so slow  that  after  several 
rounds  an  agreement was reached only on 70-odd seats,  and  not 
before  a scuffle broke out between representatives of the  Bihar 
People's Party and the Samata Party. 

The bottomline is that each of the four partners is  dissatisfied 
with  its  share  of seats. The Samata  Party,  which  wanted  to 
contest some 130 seats, is now trying to make do with 90, the BPP 
wanted  40  but was given 20, the Janata  Dal(United)  wanted  to 
contest as many seats as the Samata but its share was  determined 
at  64,  while  leaders  of the BJP pointed  out  that  they  had 
``sacrificed''  the  most, giving up 24 seats against  a  ``solid 
claim''  on  174  (based  of  the  1999  Lok  Sabha  seat-sharing 
agreement).

In  a  situation where unity was considered crucial  to  win  the 
battle against the RJD, led by Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav, a  limited 
NDA ``accord'' could cost the partners dearly.

In Orissa, the final word on seat-sharing between the BJP and the 
Biju  Janata Dal is not out. A meeting is expected to take  place 
between  the  BJP chief, Mr. Naveen Patnaik, and the  Union  Home 
Minister,  Mr. L.K. Advani. ``We still have time,'' a BJP  leader 
said, pointing out that the State would start its elections  with 
the  second  phase of polling on February 17. The  BJP  wants  to 
contest at least 70 seats and is willing to leave 77 to the  BJD, 
but the latter has not agreed to this proposition. There are also 
demands from the Samata Party and the JD(U) for accommodation  in 
a few seats in Orissa.

In  Haryana,  the BJP and the Indian National Lok Dal of  Mr.  Om 
Prakash Chautala may agree to accommodate the Akali Dal in a  few 
seats  which  border  Punjab and where there  is  a  considerable 
presence  of Sikhs. But here too the arrangement between the  BJP 
and  the INLD has not been finalised. The INLD wants the  BJP  to 
accept 25 seats, but the BJP is insisting on 35 (of a total 90).
