
Gallantry awards for Kargil heroes, others 


NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 25. Top Army strategicians, Lt.  Generals  Hari 
Mohan  Khanna  and Nirmal Chander Vij, who were among  those  who 
crafted  India's victory in Kargil, and sepoy Imiliakum  Ao  were 
today  honoured  with Distinguished Service  and  High  Gallantry 
Medals on the 51st Republic Day. 

Major   Sudhir  Kumar  of  9  Para  (Special  Force)   has   been 
posthumously  awarded  the Ashok  Chakra-the  highest  peace-time 
gallantry   medal-  for  exceptional  contribution  to   counter- 
insurgency  operations  in Jammu and Kashmir, an  Army  spokesman 
said today. 

Mahavir Chakra-nation's second highest war-time gallantry  award-
has gone to sepoy Ao of the second battalion of the Naga Regiment 
for  the Kargil war. 17 Vir Chakras, the third  highest  war-time 
award for gallantry, and 106 Sena Medals have also been announced 
for  last  year's  `Operation Vijay.' These  are  among  the  506 
Gallantry  and Distinguished Service Medals announced on the  eve 
of  the Republic Day for various operations by the  armed  forces 
across the country. 

Sarvottam  Yudh  Sewa Medal (SYSM) has been awarded  to  Lt.  Gen 
Khanna,   General  Officer  Commanding-in-Chief  of  the   Army's 
Udhampur-based  Northern  Command, which played the key  role  in 
evicting  the Pakistani intruders from Kargil last year.  He  has 
been honoured for ``distinguished service of the most exceptional 
order during war.'' 

The Director General of Military Operations (DGMO), Lt. Gen. Vij, 
has   been   honoured  with  the  Uttam  Yudh  Seva   Medal   for 
``distinguished service of an exceptional order during war''  for 
the  Kargil operations. Param Vir Chakra (PVC), the highest  war-
time  award,  would  be  presented by  the  President,  Mr.  K.R. 
Narayanan,  to  the parents of Captains, Vikram Batra  and  Manoj 
Kumar  Pandey, both of whom got the country's  highest  gallantry 
award  posthumously,  as  also  to  Rifleman  Sanjay  Kumar   and 
Grenadier  Yogendra  Singh Yadav for their gallantry  during  the 
Kargil conflict. 

The  PVCs  were announced on August 14 last here.  The  country's 
highest service medal for war, the Sarvottam Yuddh Sewa Medal was 
earlier  awarded  to the former Western Air  Command  chief,  Air 
Vice-Marshal, Mr. Vinod Patney for operation `Safed Sagar', IAF's 
role in the Kargil operations. 

Five Yudh Seva medals, one bar to Sena medal (Gallantry), 18 Sena 
Medals  (Devotion  to Duty), three Nao Sena  Medals  (Gallantry), 
three  Vayu Sena Medals (Gallantry), 18 Sena Medals (Devotion  to 
Duty), eight Nao Sena Medals (Devotion to Duty), one bar to  Vayu 
Sena  Medal (Devotion to Duty), 13 Vayu Sena Medals (Devotion  to 
Duty),  two  bars  to Vishisht Seva Medal and  88  Vishisht  Seva  
Medals have also been announced. Besides these, 197  `mention-in-
despatches' have been announced. 

- PTI
