
2 Armymen killed, Harkat's 'fidayeen' claims responsibility 


By Shujaat Bukhari

SRINAGAR,  JAN.  25.  In a ``suicidal attack''  on  the  security 
forces,  for  which  the pan-  Islamic  Harkat-ul-Mujahideen  has 
claimed responsibility, at least two Army men were killed and six 
others  injured  in  the  Batamaloo area  here  last  night.  Two 
militants were killed in the encounter that followed.

A  defence spokesman, confirming the incident, told  mediapersons 
here  that the militants fired four rifle grenades at the  Army's 
Tatoo  Ground  camp  late last evening and followed  it  up  with 
rocket launches which damaged some buildings. When two  militants 
ran into the camp and escaped into a building, the troops engaged 
them  in a half-an-hour encounter and killed them. The  spokesman 
said  that  two Junior Commissioned Officers were killed  in  the 
attack and six other soldiers received injuries. The identity  of 
the  militants is yet to be ascertained by defence officials  who 
believe they are foreigners.

However, the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, which has launched  `fidayeen' 
(suicide  squads)  in the Valley to target  security  camps,  has 
claimed responsibility for the attack. A spokesman of the  Harkat 
telephoned news organisations here and claimed that heavy  losses 
were inflicted on the security forces. This is the twelfth attack 
by the `fidayeen' of the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen and Lashkar-e-Taiba 
since  July  last in which a number of Army, BSF,  CRPF  and  SOG 
personnel have been killed.

DSP escapes life bid

In another Republic Day-eve incident, a Deputy Superintendent  of 
Police of the Special Operations Group (SOG) of the State police, 
Mr.  Jagtar  Singh,  had  a  miraculous  escape  when   militants 
detonated  an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) in Khurhama  near 
Ganderbal.  Police sources said that militants detonated the  IED 
when Mr. Singh was travelling through the area in a vehcile.  The 
vehicle was damaged but the DSP escaped unhurt and his bodyguards 
received splinter injuries. 

According  to a police spokesman two militants were killed in  an 
encounter  between militants and security forces in the  Surankot 
area  in  Poonch district. On receiving  information  the  forces 
cordoned  off  the place and started searches to  flush  out  the 
militants  but  came  under fire. In the  ensuing  encounter  the 
militants got killed and three security force personnel sustained 
injuries.

Srinagar, a ghost town

The  summer  capital sports the look of a cantonment  with  joint 
columns of various security agencies dotting the Bakhshi  Stadium  
area where the Republic Day parade is to take place. The city  is 
like  a  ghost town with ubiquitous security men  roaming  around 
with an ever-suspicious eye.

All  roads leading to the stadium have been sealed with  a  heavy 
deployment of Army, BSF, CRPF and J&K; police personnel. Even  VIP 
vehicles  are  not being spared and the identity  of  police  and 
escort personnel is being ascertained. 

Concrete  bunkers with a three-ring security around  the  stadium 
have  been  erected to minimise the threat of the  much-  dreaded 
fidayeen  squads  of  the Harkat and Lashkar.  Despite  all  this 
nothing can be ruled out, a senior security official said.  There 
is  palpable  fear  among  the  people  as  shops  and   business 
establishments  in the city remained closed today  with  skeletal 
transport in some localities. 
