
TRAI members vacate office 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  25. The Chairman  of  the  Telecom  Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI), Mr. Justice S. S. Sodhi, and all other 
TRAI  members  today  vacated office as soon  as  the  Government 
announced  that  the President had promulgated  an  Ordinance  on 
Monday bifurcating the Authority's functions.

With the issuance of the Ordinance, a separate organisation  will 
deal  with disputes in the telecom sector while the  TRAI's  role 
will be limited to advising the Government on the introduction of 
new service providers and the terms and conditions of licence  to 
a  service provider. This new dispute redress tribunal will  also 
sit in judgment on appeals against any order by the TRAI.

The  Cabinet  note  on  the  subject  justified  the  bifurcation 
observing that ``as the TRAI is the recommendatory authority  for 
several actions to be taken by the DoT, it would be inappropriate 
that the recommendatory authority and the adjudicatory  authority 
are  the same. In order to strengthen investors'  confidence  and 
provide   an  independent  and  high-powered  mechanism,  it   is 
necessary to set up a dispute redress mechanism.''

Last week, the Union Cabinet also approved a re-draft of  Section 
11(1)  of  the TRAI Act on the recommendations of  the  Group  on 
Telecom headed by the Union Finance Minister, Mr. Yashwant Sinha, 
on  order  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  the   TRAI's 
recommendatory  or advisory functions and make it  mandatory  for 
the  Government to seek the TRAI's recommendations on  all  these 
issues. The Ordinance also amends another sub-section of  Section 
11 to bring the tariff setting functions totally under the TRAI's 
purview.

The  TRAI's composition has been changed and it  will  henceforth 
comprise  three full-time members including the Chairman and  two 
part-time members instead of the present strength of seven  full-
time members.

The  Ordinance replaced a chapter in the TRAI Act to provide  for 
the  setting up of a separate disputes redress body, to be  known 
as `Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal'. 

It will adjudicate on disputes between a licensor and a licensee, 
between  two  service providers, between  service  providers  and 
consumers  and  to  hear  and  dispose  of  appeals  against  any 
direction,  decision  or order of the TRAI. Appeals  against  the 
Appellate's orders will lie with the Supreme Court 

Justice  Sodhi reasoned that the TRAI's members ceased to  be  in 
office   with  the  issuance  of  the  Ordinance   although   the 
institution will remain.  

Such  a  step,  he thought, continued  the  TRAI's  tradition  of 
transparency in taking decisions.

The  Communications Minister, Mr. Ram Vilas Paswan, was vague  as 
usual  and  confined  himself  to  general  comments.  ``We  will 
nominate  new  members to the TRAI and the Tribunal  as  soon  as 
possible,'' he said.
