
Mangalore project: Centre awaiting Karnataka's reply


NEW  DELHI, JAN. 25. The Power Ministry is awaiting a reply  from 
the   Karnataka  Government  to  decide  on  the  fate   of   the 
controversial   $  1.3  billion  fast  track  power  project   in 
Mangalore, from which the U.S multinational, Cogentrix has pulled 
out. 

``We  want the State to reply before deciding anything about  the 
project.  The  officials  from Congentrix  would  be  meeting  me 
today,''  the  Power  Minister,  Mr.  P.R.  Kumaramangalam,  told 
newspersons  today  soon  after  launching  the  website  of  his 
Ministry. 

Congentrix  had announced on January 22 that they had pulled  out 
of  the  1,000 MW counter-guaranteed  Mangalore  Power  Company's 
(MPC) project, while its partner, China Light Power Company (CLP) 
informed  the Karnataka Government about its resolve  to  execute 
the much-delayed thermal project. 

Asked whether the counter-guarantee would still be valid for  the 
project,  Mr.  Kumaramangalam said, ``counter- guarantee  to  the 
project was given on the guarantee given by the State  Government 
and  any decision taken would be after the  Karnataka  Government 
communicates to us.'' 

Stating  that  the  Government  was  planning  a  three-  pronged 
strategy for development of the power sector, he said that in the 
short-term, emphasis would be laid on development of transmission 
and  distribution systems besides taking up more  renovation  and 
modernisation works. 

In  the medium-term, emphasis would be laid on reforms and  short 
gestation capacity addition which includes generation of  thermal 
power units, Mr. Kumaramangalam said adding that in the long-term 
the  Government would take up more hydro power projects and  work 
towards  the  formation  of  a national  grid.  Asked  about  the 
resources,  he  said immediate priority would  be  given  towards 
development of R&M; projects and also for carrying out surveys and  
detailed project reports for taking up hydro power projects. 

- PTI 
