
Constitution 50, resilient 


By J. Venkatesan

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 25. The Constitution of India will  complete  50 
years tomorrow, Republic Day. It was on January 26, 1950, that it 
was enforced and with that India gave unto itself a Republic that 
is self-ruled.

To  commemorate  50 years of the working of the  Constitution,  a 
special  joint session of Parliament will be held on January  27. 
It  will be addressed by the President, the Vice- President,  the 
Speaker, the Prime Minister and leaders of the Opposition in  the 
House.

The  Constitution has so far been amended 79 times,  which  shows 
its  resilience to the requirements of ever-changing  times.  Now 
the BJP-led Government has announced its intention to  constitute 
a  committee for a comprehensive review of the Constitution.  The 
major  areas  to  be looked  into  are:  Centre-State  relations, 
Article  356  (power  of dismissal of a  State  government),  the 
judiciary,  to  enable  the setting up  of  a  National  Judicial 
Commission  which  will take care of appointments,  transfer  and 
removal of judges and electoral reforms.

The Constitution envisages a parliamentary democracy in which the 
top  executive  comes  from the elected  representatives  and  is 
answerable to the Legislature. There is a clear division of power 
among  the three organs of the Government: the  legislature,  the 
executive and the judiciary.

A  delicate balance is maintained through a system of checks  and 
balances. The Constitution gives directions to the executive  and 
the  legislature  to  bear in mind certain  principles  aimed  at 
reducing disparities and uplifting the weaker sections.

The task of harmonising the fundamental rights and the  Directive 
Principles has always been challenging. The Supreme court has won 
the  admiration of all in performing this task and for  upholding 
the rule of law.

Of  late, the general tendency among the people to litigate,  the 
incidence of a large number of government cases, lawyers adopting 
a  business-like approach and procedural delays have brought  our 
judicial  system  under strain. The number of pending  cases  has 
gone  up  and disposal has slowed down.  While  judicial  reforms 
point  out that law colleges have mushroomed since  independence, 
there has been a fall in the standards of legal education.

A  new feature in the judiciary is provision of legal aid to  the 
poor  and weaker sections as part of the Directive Principles.  A 
comprehensive  legal  aid programme has been launched and  it  is 
monitored  by a Central Authority headed by the Chief Justice  of  
India.  Lok  Adalats have been given a statutory status  and  are 
being  organised  regularly throughout the country  and  a  large 
number of cases have been settled.
