
Declare Pakistan a sponsor of terrorism: Pallone


WASHINGTON,  JAN.  25.  The  Democratic  Congressman,  Mr.  Frank 
Pallone, on Monday urged the Clinton Administration to  designate 
Pakistan as a state sponsor of terrorism abroad.

In a letter to the Secretary of State, Ms. Madeleine K. Albright, 
he  said  he  would  introduce a  legislation  in  the  House  of 
Representatives  later  this  week,  expressing  the  ``sense  of 
Congress that the State Department should take this step.''

Mr. Pallone urged the State Department to explore ways to step up 
U.S.-India  cooperation in the fight against terrorism. ``I  hope 
that  the  State  Department  will, at  a  minimum,  demand  from 
Pakistan greater accountability and cooperation on these  matters 
as a basis for improving U.S.-Pakistani relations,'' he added.

He   asked   Ms.  Albright  to  provide   ''an   explanation   or 
clarification for what the threshold is for determining whether a 
nation's   frequent  associations  with   terrorist   activities, 
movements  and individuals must finally qualify that  nation  for 
designation as a state sponsor of terrorism.''

Mr. Pallone said the recent hijacking was ``only the latest in  a 
long  series  of  incidents  that point  to  Pakistan's  role  in 
promoting violence and instability in the South Asia region.''

He  said  the hijackers were part  of  the  Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, 
which  the State Department had described as an Islamic  militant 
group based in Pakistan. 

Permanent U.N. seat

In  a  statement  in the House of  Representatives,  Mr.  Pallone 
hailed  the  Republic  of India on the  occasion  of  its  golden 
jubilee  as ``a major force for peace and stability'' and  called 
upon  the  U.S. to support India's candidature  for  a  permanent 
United Nation Security Council seat.

In  just a few years India, which accounted for one-sixth of  the 
human race, would be the most populous nation on earth. 

``It is indeed very encouraging and inspiring,'' he said,  ``that 
the  people  of  India  have lived under  a  democratic  form  of 
government for more than half a century.''

Stressing  the  shared values and common bonds of India  and  the 
U.S.,  he said while the two sides did not always agree on  every 
issue,  ``our  national interests coincide on many  of  the  most 
important concerns, such as fighting the scourge of international 
terrorism  and controlling transfer of nuclear and other  weapons 
technology to unstable regions.'' 

- UNI, PTI
