
Al Gore, Bush win Iowa caucuses


DES MOINES (IOWA), JAN. 25. The U.S. Vice-President, Mr. Al  Gore 
and  the Texas Governor, Mr. George W. Bush took confident  first 
steps   towards  the  Democratic  and   Republican   Presidential 
nominations  by winning the Iowa caucuses, the first vote of  the 
2000 campaign. 

Mr.  Gore  emphatically  defeated the former  Senator,  Mr.  Bill 
Bradley  by 63-35 per cent yesterday, giving the Vice-  President 
strong  momentum for the next crucial vote in the campaign -  the 
February  1  New Hampshire primary. ``Thank you for  the  biggest 
victory in the history of contested caucuses in Iowa. My  message 
to you this evening is very simple: we've just begun to  fight,'' 
Mr. Gore told cheering supporters. Another victory on February  1 
would put the Vice-President firmly on the path to the Democratic 
Presidential nomination and deal a serious blow to Mr.  Bradley's 
White House hopes. 

On  the Republican side, Mr. Bush led the six-man field  with  41 
per  cent. That was a respectable result but not a  blowout.  The 
publisher,  Mr. Steve Forbes was second with 30 per cent, a  much 
stronger  result than earlier public opinion  surveys  predicted, 
which  may  help him revitalise a struggling campaign.  The  talk 
radio  host,  Mr.  Alan  Keyes followed with  14  per  cent,  the 
conservative  activist,  Mr. Gary Bauer polled 9  per  cent,  the 
Arizona  Senator, Mr. John Mccain, who did not campaign in  Iowa, 
had five per cent, and the Utah Senator, Mr. Orrin Hatch had  one 
per cent. 

``We've  had a record shattering victory and I've  never  dreamed 
I'd  be able to get such a high vote,'' Mr. Bush told  reporters. 
The previous best result by a Republican in a contested Iowa race 
was the 37 per cent recorded by the former Senator, Mr. Bob  Dole 
in  1988.  In  his victory speech, Mr. Bush  again  stressed  his 
central   campaign   theme  -  that  he  is   a   ``compassionate 
conservative.''  ``Seven  months ago I came to Iowa  on  a  plane 
dubbed  `Great  expectations.' Well tonight,  Iowa  has  exceeded 
them,'' he said. 

But  Mr.  Bush's  claim of a historic victory was  likely  to  be 
disputed  by his rivals. Polls had predicted the  Texas  Governor 
winning an even bigger victory. Mr. Forbes said he was the  moral 
victor.  ``It  gives  us fantastic momentum and  creates  a  good 
three-way  race,'' he said. Around 500,000  registered  Democrats 
and  a  similar number of Republicans can attend  local  precinct 
meetings  in  the  evening to cast their  votes.  But  less  than 
100,000 in each party were actually showing up.

- Reuters 
