
All hostages freed in pre-dawn swoop 


By P. S. Suryanarayana 

SINGAPORE,  JAN. 25. In a pre-dawn raid today,  Thailand's  elite 
commandos stormed the hospital and released all the hostages held 
there  by  10 terrorists of the `God's Army'  in  the  Ratchaburi 
province.  Nine  terrorists  were  killed  in  the  operation  by 
Thailand's  military  and  other security  personnel.  The  other 
hostage-taker was later shot dead as he fled. 

Several hundred persons - patients, doctors and others - had been 
held hostage by the masked gunmen for nearly 24 hours. There were 
no  indications  of injuries to any of the hostages as  a  direct 
result of the commando assault, though at least one Thai military 
official was hurt in the operation against the group, a  splinter 
faction  of  the  Karen  National  Union  fighting  the  military 
government in Myanmar. The freed patients were shifted to  nearby 
hospitals. 

As  details  of  the  successful  operation  were  announced   by 
Thailand's  Prime Minister, Mr. Chuan Leekpai, its  military  and 
civilian officials, it won the appreciation of the Yangon regime, 
which had been cross with him for the handling of the seizure  of 
the Myanmarese embassy in Bangkok last October. On that occasion, 
the  hostages  were freed only after the gunmen, belonging  to  a 
Myanmarese  pro-democracy  student faction, were allowed  a  safe 
passage  out of Thailand, with the Thai Deputy Foreign  Minister, 
Mr. Sukhumbhand Paribatra, acting both as their escort and  their 
prize proxy-hostage. 

In contrast, a point of much significance to Yangon was that  the 
Thai  authorities  succeeded in killing  the  hostage-takers  who 
belonged  to a group that had given shelter to those involved  in 
the earlier seizure of the Myanmarese embassy in Bangkok. It  was 
not  immediately clear whether the slain hostage-takers  included 
those who had seized the embassy.

The  raid followed a late-night meeting in the town  between  the 
Mr. Chuan and top military commanders. 

It  is  understood that the primary political  consideration  was 
that  the  hospital  could not be  equated  with  the  Myanmarese 
embassy  which  by  definition  was  not  treated  as  Thailand's 
territory for purpose of a commando-style rescue- operation.  The 
Thai Prime Minister's Security Adviser said that ``hospitals  are 
supposed  to  be free and safe even during war- time''  and  that 
``nobody takes hospitals hostage.''

The  Thai  authorities  initially placed a high  premium  on  the 
safety  of  the  hostages, with the  Army  Chief,  Gen.  Surayudh 
Chulanont, saying that an attempt would be made to  ``negotiate'' 
with  the gunmen by ``focusing on the safety of  the  hostages.''  
However, the strong resentment among the Thais who felt that  the 
Myanmarese  rebels were abusing Bangkok's  humanitarian  approach 
towards them led to the action. The Thai security forces  entered 
the  hospital in the guise of medical personnel and prepared  the 
ground for the strike, according to officials in Bangkok.

Earlier, during talks with the rebel group, the Thai  authorities 
indicated  their `willingness' to allow the wounded Karen  rebels 
and refugees to cross into Thailand for medication. But the Thais 
refused  to  give  the  hostage-takers a  safe  passage  and  two 
helicopters  for that purpose. Bangkok also maintained  that  its 
military  personnel were not engaged in a policy of shelling  the 
Karen rebels on the Myanmarese side of the border.
