
S. Africa rejects DRC charges 


By M.S. Prabhakara

CAPE  TOWN, JAN. 25. South Africa has rejected what it  describes 
as  ``allegations''  in ``recent media reports'' that it  is  not 
impartial  in the ongoing conflict in the Great Lakes  sub-region 
and,  in  fact,  that it is  providing  assistance  to  ``certain 
belligerents to the conflict.''

In  fact,  the said allegations amount  to  several  accusations, 
including one that South Africa has supplied arms to the ``rebels 
and  aggressors,''  made  by  the  President  of  the  Democratic 
Republic of Congo (DRC), Mr. Laurent Kabila in an interview  last 
week in Pretoria News.

Without   referring  specifically  to  Mr.   Kabila's   trenchant 
criticisms  of South Africa's policy towards the DRC conflict,  a 
statement issued today by the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) 
in  Pretoria  said that South Africa remained  committed  to  ``a 
process that would ensure that the interests of all the Congolese 
are promoted.'' South Africa further supported ``interaction with 
all  parties  to the conflict, in acceptance  of  the  principles 
agreed upon by the Lusaka ceasefire agreement.''

A  crucial  sentence  reads thus:  ``South  Africa  supports  the 
perspectives  of the Lusaka agreement that the existence  of  the 
rebel movements and the non-military opposition groups is a  fact 
in the political dynamics of the DRC and that unless this fact is 
accepted there will be no progress in the full implementation  of 
the Lusaka ceasefire agreement.''

Equally crucial is the reiteration of the South African  position 
that  it has ``since the Pretoria Declaration of 23 August,  1998 
consistently  and tirelessly promoted a ceasefire agreement  that 
would  call  for cessation of hostilities, troop  standstill  and 
withdrawal of all foreign troops on DRC soil.'' 

Both  these  positions, and the underlying  implications  of  the 
``inclusive  government'' formula first promoted by South  Africa 
in the dying days of the Mobutu regime (even then firmly rejected 
by  Mr. Kabila), cut to the very heart of the DRC conflict.  They 
also  indicate the ongoing contradictions between the stances  of 
South Africa and its closest neighbours on the DRC issue. Indeed, 
they also hint at why the Lusaka Accord has thus far been a  non-
starter,  with not even the first item of  its  elaborately-drawn 
peace  time  table  - cessation of hostilities  -  as  yet  fully 
implemented.

Mr.  Kabila maintains that he heads a legitimate government,  and 
what  the DRC has been facing since August 1998 is not so much  a 
civil  war  as an invasion by Rwanda and Uganda,  in  support  of 
malcontent domestic rebel factions. Furthermore, Angola,  Namibia  
and Zimbabwe, which support the DRC government, have done so at a 
state-to-state  level  with the legitimate government  there,  in 
terms of bi - and multilateral treaty obligations, the latter  as 
members  under  the charter of the Southern  African  Development 
Community  (SADC).  Neither  Rwanda nor Uganda  are  SADC  member 
states.

Hence, any reference to a need to accept rebel movements and non-
military opposition groups as ``a fact in the political  dynamics 
of  the  DRC'' is bound to be seen as  an  intolerable  political 
provocation in Kinshasa. 

The  reiteration  of South Africa's commitment to  the  so-called 
Pretoria Declaration of August 23, 1998 is consistent with such a 
provocative  approach.  That  meeting was convened  by  the  then 
President,  Mr.  Nelson Mandela in his capacity as chair  of  the 
SADC,  to  address the deepening conflict in  the  DRC.  However, 
although Angola and Zimbabwe had begun to extend help to the  DRC 
government to repel the ``rebels and aggressors,'' notably absent 
from  the  talks  were not only the DRC  President,  Mr.  Kabila, 
surely central to any initiative pertinent to the issue, but also 
Mr. Robert Mugabe, President of Zimbabwe and Mr. Jose Eduardo dos 
Santos, President of Angola.

One  of a spate of initiatives taken on all sides, at least  some 
mere exercises in regional one-upmanship, the Pretoria ``summit'' 
was  widely  seen  as  an attempt by  South  Africa  to  use  its 
political and economic clout to paint the DRC and its allies into 
a corner. However, even the Pretoria summit acknowledged that the 
``Democratic  Republic  of the Congo has a  government  in  place 
which  the  summit recognises and which is  headed  by  President 
Laurent Kabila.''

Thus,  on  the  one hand, there is a  public  acknowledgement  by 
regional  players that Mr. Kabila heads a legitimate  government. 
At  the  same time, it is urged that  not  merely  ``non-military 
opposition  groups''  but  also  ``rebel  movements,''  also   be 
acknowledged as ``a fact in the political dynamics of the DRC.''

This   amounts  to  a  phenomenal  exercise  in  political   spin 
doctoring,  a  feat  which perhaps only South  Africa,  with  its 
purported moral heft, may in the end manage to pull off.
