
Russians admit growing losses 


By Vladimir Radyuhin

MOSCOW,  JAN. 25. As fighting in Chechnya's capital  Grozny  grew 
fiercer,   the  Russian  military  admitted   suffering   growing 
casualties  in  the four-month- old campaign for control  of  the 
breakaway region.

The Interfax news agency reported ``sharply intensified'' battles 
in  Grozny  on  Tuesday, with fighting  concentrated  around  the 
Minutka  square  which leads to an important  bridge  across  the 
Sunzha River near the centre of the city.

Russian  forces  reported capturing the bridge, which  links  two 
parts of Grozny, back in December, but control over the strategic 
location  has since been changing hands. Interfax  said  Chechens 
defending  Grozny had turned many buildings into  ``fortresses.'' 
Russian  troops  also  often  withdraw  from  captured  buildings 
fearing  overnight  ambushes only to find rebels  take  over  the 
buildings the next day.

Moscow  today  released  far  higher  casualty  figures  than  it 
admitted so far. The new official toll includes over 900 soldiers 
killed  and  about 2500 wounded since the  September  flare-  up. 
Interfax quoted sources in the security forces as saying  Russian 
forces lost 529 in Chechnya since the storming of Grozny began  a 
month ago.

However, independent sources insist that Russian casualty figures 
are  still  grossly under-reported. The  Committee  of  Soldiers' 
Mothers maintains that close to 3,000 soldiers had been killed in 
the  campaign,  while the private NTV television  estimated  that 
Russian losses in Chechnya are 10 times greater than the official 
figures.

An  NTV report from a military hospital in the southern  town  of 
Rostov,  where all killed personnel of the Defence  Ministry  are 
being sent from Chechnya, said the number of corpses reaches 30 a 
day and sometimes goes as high as 50. The figure did not  include 
the Interior Ministry troops, who make up a big proportion of the 
dead.

A  source  in the Russian headquarters in Chechnya told  the  AVN 
military news agency on Tuesday that federal forces would need 10 
to 15 days at the minimum to take Grozny. When the assault  began 
in December, the military promised to capture the city within  10 
days.

In  a  sign of Moscow's displeasure over the lack of  success  in 
Grozny, Russia's Acting President, Mr. Vladimir Putin, sacked the 
commander  of  the  Interior  Ministry  forces,  who  have   been 
spearheading the storming of the Chechen capital. Gen. Vyacheslav  
Ovchinnikov  has been replaced by a Defence Ministry  General  in 
what  appeared  to  be an attempt to boost  coordination  of  the 
different  forces  fighting  in  Chechnya.  The  newly  appointed 
commander,  Gen. Vyacheslav Tikhomirov, fought in Afghanistan  in 
the 1980s and in Chechnya in 1994-1996 and has a reputation of  a 
military hawk.
