
Clinton visit hinges on Pak. crackdown on militant outfits


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD, JAN. 25. The United States has identified the  Harkat-
ul-Mujahideen  (HUM) as being responsible for the hijack  of  the 
Indian Airlines aircraft and has called upon the Musharraf regime 
to take strong action against the outfit, among other groups. 

Informed  sources  told The Hindu that during  his  two-hour-long 
meeting   with  the  Pakistani  Chief  Executive,   Gen.   Pervez 
Musharraf, on Friday, the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State,  Mr. 
Karl  Inderfurth,  linked the visit of the U. S.  President,  Mr. 
Bill Clinton, to Islamabad, with strong Pakistani action  against 
terrorist groups. 

Mr.  Inderfurth, who repeatedly raised the  hijacking-  terrorism 
issue  during  his  discussions,  told  Gen.  Musharraf  that   a 
``positive'' decision on Mr. Clinton's visit was possible if  his 
Government launched a ``crackdown'' on the ``jehadi groups''. 

According to the sources, Gen. Musharraf told Mr. Inderfurth that 
``immediate action'' against the groups may not be possible,  but 
indicated  that  such  a move may be possible  in  the  next  few 
months. 

Ironically  enough, these sources also stated that owing  to  the 
sharp  nosedive  in  relations between Pakistan  and  India,  the 
chances  of  a Clinton visit to Pakistan had  actually  improved. 
``Soon  after  the October 12 coup, it looked as if  Mr.  Clinton 
would not be visiting Pakistan, but now we have a situation where 
India and Pakistan are locked in conflict,'' they maintained. 

According  to  the sources, no final decision had been  taken  in 
Washington about the visit, adding that an announcement about the 
U.S. President's tour of the region, which looks likely in  March 
this year, could be made any day. 

It is also clear that the U.S. looks at the Musharraf  Government 
as the ``last chance'' for Pakistan to ``rescue'' itself from the 
growing spectre of fundamentalism.

If,  in  the  coming weeks, the U.S. does not  see  any  tangible 
movement,  then  it's  relations with Pakistan could  be  in  for 
further turbulence. 

The  all-crucial  question for the U.S. is - Can  Gen.  Musharraf 
deliver? Can he curb the various outfits that operate in the name 
of  Kashmir?  As  of now, there does not appear to  be  any  real 
answer to this question. 
