
CDU admits receiving slush funds


By Batuk Gathani

BRUSSELS,  JAN.  25.  The  main  German  Opposition  party,   the 
Christian  Democratic  Union (CDU), now deeply embroiled  in  the 
slush  fund  scandal, on Monday admitted hiding  some  6  million 
euros  received from anonymous donors between 1989 and  1999,  in 
the heydays of the then Chancellor, Mr. Helmet Kohl's rule.

It  is an open secret that the so-called ``secret  contributors'' 
are  Germany's  controversial arms dealers and  lobbyists,  whose 
services  were retained by prominent German companies  to  wangle 
commercial  orders.  An  analyst  pointed out  that  an  army  of 
accountants, numbering upto 5,000, may be needed to sort out  the 
various corruption cases coming to the fore all over Europe.

Now  desperately engaged in a major damage  limitation  exercise, 
senior CDU officials are beginning to ponder a strategy to  check 
the  party's fast depleting funds amid the realisation  that  the 
scandal  will  cost  the party about 18 million  euros  in  fines 
alone,  apart  from drying out contributions from  the  dwindling 
supporters of the CDU.

The  immediate  fall-out  of the scandal is  the  fast  vanishing 
credibility of the CDU among the electorate. The party leadership 
is  waking  up  to  a potential  disaster  in  the  coming  State 
elections in the north of the country. 

Germany's  most  controversial  arms  dealer  and  lobbyist,  Mr. 
Schreiber, now exiled in Canada and facing German tax dodging

charges,  threatens to spill the beans and  promises  revelations 
that he says will push top CDU leaders ``into a hole so deep  you 
would not hear them hitting the bottom.''

Obviously,  all this is ideal fodder for the German and  European 
media   as  the  ``Kohl  affair''  continues  to   attract   more 
controversy  about the ``cancer that is eating away  at  Europe's 
post-war  political arrangements and institutions -  and  perhaps 
points a way to the cure.''

The average European is shocked by the party shenanigans in major 
European  countries  from  Britain to Italy  and  from  Spain  to 
Russia,  but the Kohl affair is rated as a major blow to the  so-
called ethical standards in European public life. A more  cynical 
perception in many quarters is that ``it has always been there  - 
only this time the bubble has burst open in Germany.'' In  Italy, 
the  German response to the Kohl affair is regarded as  ``emotive 
and  melodramatic''  as  many Italians are  convinced  that  most 
politicians are essentially corrupt.

Britons can seek solace in the knowledge that the recent scandals  
in  the  Tory  party  during the  evening  of  Mr.  John  Major's 
premiership  was a ``we-knew-about-it'' affair and  they  eagerly 
look for the first dark clouds on the Blair horizon. 
