
West Asia accord on final status likely 


By Kesava Menon

MANAMA  (BAHRAIN)  JAN.  25.  It  is  likely  that  Israeli   and 
Palestinian  officials  will sign some sort of  an  agreement  on 
February  13.  It  is also possible that this  document  will  be 
called  ``Framework Agreement on Final Status Issues'' as it  was 
supposed  to  be  called when the deadline  was  originally  set. 
However,  it  would  be  overly  optimistic  to  think  that  the 
agreement  will  bring the two sides much closer  to,  let  alone 
clinching, a permanent settlement of their dispute. 

The  Palestinian Authority President, Mr. Yasser Arafat, who  was 
in  the  United States last week, refuses to divulge  whether  he 
still  believes  that  the framework agreement  will  be  signed. 
Provision  for such an agreement was made in a deal  struck  last 
September  -  the Wye-II memorandum - and it was envisaged  as  a 
document  which  would  provide  the  outline  for  a   permanent 
settlement.

Even  at  the  outset,  the two sides and  the  U.S.,  which  had 
brokered  the deal, had played safe by suggesting that  it  might 
not  be  much more than a declaration of principles. But  in  the 
euphoria of a signing ceremony and the momentum created after the 
Wye-II measures were implemented initially, there was brave  talk 
that  at least some of the contentious issues would be  resolved, 
come February. 

Even cautious optimism appears to be ruled out now. According  to 
reports  in  the  Israeli press, the U.S. is talking  only  of  a 
declaration  of  principles at this stage.  Although  negotiators 
from  the two sides embarked on an intensive round of talks  over 
the  last week there is no sign that they have made  progress  on 
any one of the five major issues that have to be settled before a 
permanent settlement can be reached.

The  U.S. President, Mr. Bill Clinton, who wants Israel  and  the 
Palestinians to arrive at a settlement before the end of his term 
in office, is reportedly pressing them to make compromises.  That 
would  imply  that he has given up earlier hopes of  brokering  a 
deal in which neither side believes it has lost too much. 

There  were  reports earlier this month that  the  Israeli  Prime 
Minister,  Mr.  Ehud  Barak,  was  contemplating  a   significant 
concession  in  respect  of the Palestinians'  demand  that  they 
should  have  East  Jerusalem  as the  capital  of  their  state. 
According  to  these  reports,  the  Israelis  were  readying  to 
transfer the village of Abu Dis on the fringes of Jerusalem.  Abu 
Dis has been identified as having the right location and adequate 
space  to set up the Palestinian capital area once the  state  is 
formed. Given its location, its link-up with East Jerusalem would 
have  been natural and the Palestinians would have been  able  to  
claim  that  Al  Quds (the Arab name for  Jerusalem)  had  indeed 
become their capital.

These  reports  also  stated  that  Mr.  Barak  was  thinking  of 
transferring  the  supervision  of civil  affairs  in  the  Arab- 
populated  districts  of  East Jerusalem to the  control  of  the 
Palestinian Authority. If these two transfers - of Abu Dis and of 
civilian  affairs in East Jerusalem - had come to pass  then  the 
Palestinian demand on Jerusalem would have been substantially met 
though the question of authority over the Walled City would still 
have remained a controversial hold-over. However, just before Mr. 
Arafat  left  for Washington, he was reportedly informed  by  Mr. 
Barak  that  the  twin  transfer could  not  take  place  in  the 
immediate future. 

While the Palestinians do seem reconciled to some adjustments  of 
the borders between the West Bank and Israel, which could include 
the  permanent transfer of a large number of  Jewish  settlements 
and their lands to Israel, there is no sign that any headway  has 
been made on the issues of settlements and borders. The  question 
of the Palestinian refugees, and their right to return, cannot be 
settled except in the wider context of agreements between  Israel 
on  the one hand and Syria and Lebanon on the other. Those  talks 
are stalled as well. 

All  that  remains to be substantially dealt with in  the  likely 
declaration in February is the question of Palestinian statehood. 
It  is  no longer seriously suggested that any  party,  including 
Israel,  can prevent a Palestinian state from coming into  being. 
Even  the  Israeli  right  wing seems  to  have  recognised  that 
Palestinian statehood is very much on the cards.

However, Israel still has a problem with a unilateral Palestinian 
declaration  of statehood before a comprehensive deal is  struck. 
It  fears that if the Palestinians declare their state,  and  get 
recognised by others, then Israel would be cast as having illegal 
possession  of another state's sovereign territory. So,  although 
Mr.  Arafat  still  insists  that he has  the  right  to  declare 
statehood  by  September, Israel and probably the U.S.  as  well, 
will  do  their  best  to  head  him  off  till  a  comprehensive 
settlement has been reached.
