
Minister allays fears over statute amendment move


By Our Staff Reporter

COIMBATORE, JAN. 25. The Union Minister of State for Law, Justice 
and  Company  Affairs,  Mr. O. Rajagopal, has  said  the  secular 
spirit  of  the Constitution of India would be protected  in  the 
process of effecting changes to it.

Addressing presspersons here today, Mr. Rajagopal sought to allay 
fears  that  the  move  of  the  NDA  Government  to  amend   the 
Constitution was fraught with danger to the secular spirit of the 
Constitution. He said secularism was not only the culture of this 
country  but  it  was also a part of  the  Constitution  and  was 
contained  in  the fundamental rights. When  these  rights  would 
remain, how could secularism alone be removed, he asked. 

A Constitution Review Committee would be formed shortly. It would 
comprise  eminent  political and social personalities  and  legal 
experts  who  would  suggest changes and place  them  before  the 
Government. The panel should have been formed before January  26, 
2000,   but  some  emergency  situations  had   constrained   the 
Government to shift attention on to them.

The  Government  move was also with focus on the use  of  Article 
356.  ``For long, it had been used according to one's  own  sweet 
will and pleasure'', Mr. Rajagopal said suggesting that it's  use 
had  to be restrained and only where and when it  was  absolutely 
essential  for the Centre to dismiss a government elected by  the 
people of a State. 

Later, addressing members of the Coimbatore Bar Association,  the 
Minister  said  the  legal  system  had  to  be  Indianised   and 
modernised.  To  bring  good talent into the  legal  system,  the 
Government   was   planning   to  establish   world   class   law 
institutions.

At  the  press  conference, Mr. Rajagopal  said  the  Centre  was 
considering  the demand of the NDA constituent from  Tamil  Nadu, 
Pattali Makkal Katchi, that reservation policy be followed in the 
appointment of Judges. 
