
HC dismisses plea of prisoner 


CHENNAI, JAN.25. A writ petition filed by a prisoner facing death 
sentence,  challenging  a communication informing  him  that  the 
President had rejected his mercy petition, has been dismissed  by 
the Madras High Court.

His  case was that because of the one-year and five months  delay 
in  the  disposal of his mercy petition, the death  sentence  was 
liable to be commuted.

Mr.Justice K. Govindarajan, who perused the official files on the 
mercy  petition, held it was clear that the Executive  had  taken 
diligent  steps  on  the mercy petition in  the  midst  of  other 
administrative  functions  and hence the  petitioner's  case  (of 
delay) could not be countenenced.

However, on a plea from Govindasamy's counsel, the Judge directed 
the authorities, not to implement the death sentence for 10 days, 
to enable him file an appeal.

Govindasamy  was  charged with murdering five  persons  including 
Nallamalai Gounder, his wife, two sons and a daughter on May  29, 
1984  at  Kondampalayam.  However, in 1985  the  Sessions  Court, 
Coimbatore,  acquitted him of the charges. On a  criminal  appeal 
filed  by the State, a Madras High Court Division Bench  reversed 
the order and awarded him death sentence in September 1997. After 
his  appeal in the Supreme Court failed, he submitted  his  mercy 
petition to the Tamil Nadu Governor and President on May 6, 1998. 
The  Governor rejected his plea in September 1998. The  President 
by an order dated October 27, 1999, rejected his plea, which  was 
communicated to him by the Government on October 30 last. 

Pointing  to  various  High  Court  and  Supreme  Court   orders, 
Gonvidasamy  challenged this order, contending that there was  no 
explanation for the delay.

Pointing to various Court decisions, Mr.Justice Govindarajan said 
the  petitioner  could not take advantage of the  fact  that  his 
petition  was  disposed  of after one year and  five  months.  As 
Govindasamy  was  in jail only from 1997, pursuant  to  the  High 
Court order in the appeal, it could not be stated he was in  jail 
for long years.

According to the Union Government, the mercy petition, which came 
from  the State Government on August 26, 1998, was  submitted  to 
the  Home  Minister for his advice on November 2,  1998.  It  was 
forwarded  to  the  President  on  November  11  that  year.  The 
President sought for and got the opinion of the Attorney  General 
on May 14, 1999. It was re-submitted to the Home Minister on June 
6, 1999. The file was again submitted to the President on July 9, 
1999; on October 20, 1999, the President rejected the plea, which 
was communited to the State Government on October 27. 

It was clear that the executive took diligent steps on the  mercy 
petition  in  the midst of other administrative  functions.  ``We 
cannot expect the Executive to deal with the mercy petitions on a 
day-to-day  basis.  The  above reasons set  out  in  the  counter 
affidavit, explaining the period taken to dispose of the petition 
cannot be said to be unreasonable,'' the Judge noted.

Although, the court was concerned with the petitioner's life, the 
Judge  said,  the  case  could not be decided  on  the  basis  of 
sentiment.  Such sentiment could also play only within the  frame 
of the Rule of Law and to free a prisoner save through the ``open 
Sesame''  of  Justice according to law. It was not  open  to  the 
court to be persuaded by its own ideas.

As  the  President  had passed the order  after  considering  the 
entire materials and the advice given to him, ``this court is not 
inclined  to accept the petitioner's case and to  interfere  with 
the impugned order,'' Mr.Justice Govindarajan said dismissing the 
writ petition.
