
AIADMK may contest all three seats 


By Suresh Nambath

CHENNAI,  JAN.  25.  With  the  TMC  disinclined  for  an  ``open 
alliance''  with the AIADMK at this stage, the AIADMK-led  front, 
at  its meeting tomorrow, is expected to support the  candidature 
of the AIADMK in all the three seats - Aranthangi, Tiruchi-II and 
Nellikuppam.

That would close the possibility of a common opposition candidate 
of  the TMC or the Dalit Panthers contesting in Nellikuppam.  The 
AIADMK  had  already  declared  the other  two  seats  as  ``non-
negotiable.''

When  the  seat  negotiations for the  Assembly  by-polls  became 
ticklish, the AIADMK got into a `hard bargaining mode' so as  not 
to  surrender its `indisputably dominant partner  status'  before 
the general election.

Three seats in an Assembly nearing the end of its term might  not 
appear  important,  but  the  AIADMK  wanted  to  use  the   seat 
negotiations  as the basis for building a broad-based  opposition 
front. What the AIADMK general secretary, Ms. Jayalalitha,  wants 
to  demonstrate  through a victory in the by-polls  is  that  the 
people prefer the AIADMK front to the DMK front.

Though  keen  to have the TMC in a common front,  the  AIADMK  is 
uncomfortable with that party's continued talk of  ``equidistance 
from  communalism and corruption.'' There is a feeling in  AIADMK 
circles  that the TMC harps on the issue of corruption merely  to 
increase  its  electoral  bargaining strength  in  time  for  the 
general election.

The  AIADMK strategy is to reduce the next general election to  a 
two-front  fight  between the DMK and the AIADMK. Victory  in  at 
least  two  of the three constituencies in the  by-  polls  could 
enthuse  the front cadre and create the right situation  for  the 
general election.

The  Dalit  Panthers of India, an ally of the TMC,  was  keen  to 
enter the fray in Nellikuppam as a common candidate of the AIADMK 
and TMC fronts. However, the TMC, fearing that this would  commit 
it to a direct alliance with the AIADMK, shot down the idea.  For 
the  DPI,  there  are several problems in this  situation.  As  a 
constituent  of  the  TMC-front, it  cannot  contest  Nellikuppam 
except as a TMC-front candidate. By taking a unilateral  decision 
to contest, the DPI would be cutting itself off from the TMC. And 
if it decides not to contest, then the Puthiya Thamizhagam, which 
has announced the intention to field candidates in all the  three 
seats, might take over the Dalit constituency.

While the DPI convenor, Mr. R. Thirumavalavan, is confident about  
convincing  his  party members on the need to  refrain  from  the 
contest, he is apprehensive about non-DPI Dalits who might switch 
support to the PT in the interest of Dalit consolidation.

In  the  1996 Assembly election, the DMK won Nellikuppam  in  the 
company of the TMC. At that time, the PT and the DPI were not  in 
the picture.
