
HC orders arrest of officer 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 25. The Madras High Court has directed  the  Joint 
Director  (south  Zone),  CBI, to take steps to  arrest  a  woman 
central  excise  officer,   said to be involved  in  a  narcotics 
trafficking  case. It also directed the State DGP to  assist  the 
CBI  in apprehending the woman officer by providing officers  and 
facilities.

The  Court gave the direction after observing that the  officials 
of the Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) were totally ineffective in 
executing  a  non-bailable warrant for her arrest  ``for  reasons 
best known to them''.

Mr.  Paulsamy  and his wife, Ms. Giladys Lily,  were  working  as 
Superintendents  of  Central  Excise  at  Madurai  and  Thanjavur 
respectively. In August 1998, Mr.Paulsamy was charged by the  NCB 
with  possessing  two  kg of heroin in his  room.  He  was  later 
enlarged  on bail. But his wife, named as second accused  in  the 
case,  despite being transferred did not report for duty and  was 
`absconding', the NCB said.

When  Mr.Paulsamy's  petition seeking to  quash  the  proceedings 
under  the  complaint came up before  Mr.Justice  Dinakaran,  the 
Special  PP  for NCB, Mr. Rajamanickam, contended  that  she  was 
attempting to tamper with the witnesses and evading arrest.

Mr.  Justice  Dinakaran said the NCB appeared not to  have  taken 
effective  steps till date to either cancel Mr  Paulsamy's  bail, 
nor execute the NBW against Ms.Lily.

In the circumstances, the Judge directed the J.D, CBI, to  arrest 
Ms.Lily by executing the NBW and report to the Court on Thursday. 
He also directed the State DGP to provide the CBI with a  minimum 
of one Assistant Commissioner, two inspectors, 10 personnel, with 
vehicle and wireless facilities to execute the order. The NCB and 
the  CBI were at liberty to take action against persons, said  to 
have  harboured the woman officer. The NCB director  should  take 
action  against the officials concerned with executing  the  NBW. 
Mr.  Justice  Dinakaran  directed the Registry  to  call  for  an 
explanation from the Special Judge for NDPS cases, for not taking 
steps  against  the  Bureau for their failure  in  executing  the 
warrant.
