
Gram panchayat polls: 3 Cong. MLAs oppose Ghorpade's decision 


By Our Special Correspondent

BANGALORE, JAN. 25. A storm is brewing in the ruling Congress (I) 
with  three  MLAs  strongly opposing the decision  taken  by  the 
Minister  for  Rural  Development and Panchayat Raj,  Mr.  M.  Y. 
Ghorpade, to hold the gram panchayat elections next month without 
changing the roster system of reservation adopted by the previous 
Janata  Dal  Government.  It  is  the  first  public  display  of 
dissidence  by ruling party MLAs and what is astonishing  is  the 
tone and tenor of their attack on the senior Minister.

The  three MLAs are Mr. C. M. Lingappa representing  Ramanagaram, 
Mr.  Anjana Murthy (Nelamangala) and Mr. H. M. Revanna  (Magadi). 
Interestingly,  all  the  three belong  to  the  Bangalore  Rural 
District  and were left out of the Ministry, and a  junior  party 
leader  from the district, Mr. D. K. Shivakumar, appointed  as  a 
Cabinet Minister.

In  a  statement to the press, the three said  that  through  his 
decision,  Mr. Ghorpade had in fact ensured that  no  Congress(I) 
leader at the panchayat level contested the election. The  roster 
system adopted by the J. H. Patel Government in January 1999  had 
been designed to help the Janata Dal and to adversely affect  the 
interests  of  the Congress (I). The roster  prepared  under  the 
Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act of 1993 had made reservation of seats 
for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes A and  B 
categories and the general category. 

They  have alleged that though he was aware of the  intention  of 
the   Dal  Government,  Mr.  Ghorpade  had  stubbornly   resisted 
pressures  from  his Ministerial colleagues and  party  MLAs  and 
taken  a  hasty  decision on holding elections.  ``It  is  a  bad 
decision''  which would harm the Congress (I) not merely  in  the 
gram  panchayat  elections  but  also  in  the  taluk  and  zilla 
panchayat elections. 

The  MLAs have gone further to say that there was no need at  all 
to  have a Cabinet Minister for Rural Development  and  Panchayat 
Raj  to  implement  the roster system  adopted  by  the  previous 
Government. ``A tahsildar is enough to do it.''

They  have  gone to the extent of warning Mr.  Ghorpade  that  he 
might  have  to pay a heavy price, say by way of  giving  up  his 
ministership,  once  the  gram panchayat  election  results  were 
announced.

Mr.  Ghorpade  had  pointed  out  that  elections  to  the   gram 
panchayats  were  being held on `non-party' basis.  It  might  be 
recalled  that  one or two of his Cabinet  colleagues  had  taken 
exception  to his remark at a press conference that he would  not 
hesitate to resign if the gram panchayat elections were not  held  
at the earliest. Mr. Ghorpade had further said that Karnataka had 
violated the constitutional provision (73rd Amendment)  regarding 
panchayat  elections by not holding them when they became due  in 
December 1998. He was referring to the Janata Dal Government.  In 
fairness to Mr. Ghorpade, it must be said that he was  responding 
to a hypothetical question on his resignation.

According   to  observers,  though  they  were  criticising   Mr. 
Ghorpade,  the three MLAs were making a veiled criticism  of  the 
Chief Minister, Mr. S. M. Krishna, himself. Such decisions as the 
date  of  holding panchayat elections are taken by  the  Cabinet. 
Only  on  Sunday,  Mr. Krishna said that he  expected  the  State 
Election Commission (Panchayats) to announce the calendar for the 
elections on January 27 or 28.
