
Local body polls: Cong. keen on tie-up with Communists 


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  25.  The  Congress(I)  is  keen  on   ``limited 
electoral  adjustments''  with  the Left parties  in  the  coming 
elections for the municipalities and panchayat raj institutions.

The  issue  figured  at  the  extended  meeting  of  the  APCC(I) 
Executive Committee on Tuesday and it was resolved to leave it to 
the  district units of the party to work out mutually  beneficial 
adjustments  with the CPI, the CPI(M) and other  secular  parties 
with the sole aim of defeating the TDP-BJP combine.

Briefing  presspersons  later, the APCC(I) president, Dr.  Y.  S. 
Rajasekhara  Reddy, said that the electoral tie-up for the  civic 
polls was discussed informally with the CPI leadership though  no 
such discussions were held with the CPI(M) leadership. 

He  did not sound optimistic on striking an understanding at  the 
State-level  though  he spoke of the possibilities of  coming  to 
``limited understanding wherever possible.'' 

He, however, parried questions on the scope of understanding with 
the Left parties and whether the party was prepared to leave  the 
posts of municipal chairperson to the CPI.

Party  sources said the Vijayawada Municipal Corporation held  by 
the  Communists  figured specifically at the meeting and  it  was 
noted that the local leaders were not prepared to leave the Mayor 
post  to  the  CPI under the formula of  seat  adjustments  being 
explored by party leaders.

The PCC(I) Executive Committee opposed postponement of  elections 
to  the  Panchayat  Raj  institutions  on  the  ground  that  the 
necessary  constitutional  amendments to restore  the  three-tier 
structure of Panchayt Raj could not be carried out.

Dr.  Reddy  said  the  party was  in  favour  of  the  three-tier 
structure  in the place of the existing five tier set-up bud  did 
not  want postponement of elections on this count. The  Executive 
Committee also took serious note of the ``irregularities'' in the 
identification   of  the  municipalities  for  the   purpose   of 
reservations for the SCs, the STs, the BCs and women. The process 
adopted  by  the  Government  lacked  transparency.  Against  the 
statutory 15 per cent reservation for SCs and 7 per cent for STs, 
the  posts identified for these communities worked out to 11  per 
cent  and 3 per cent respectively. The PCC-I president urged  the 
State   Election  Commission  to  ``oversee''  the   process   of 
reservations and ensure that the notification was issued at least 
ten days before the notification on the elections, giving  enough 
time for considering the objections.

The PCC(I) president said the Executive Committee had resolved to 
decentralise  the  process  of  selecting  candidates.  Observers 
deputed  by the PCC(I) to districts would interact with  the  DCC 
functionaries  and local leaders to arrive at a consensus on  the 
candidates.  The  endeavour would be to accommodate  the  maximum 
number of youths and women even in general category seats.

Party   leaders  from  Khammam  district  accused  the   district 
Collector, Mr. Giridhar, of acting in a partisan manner, ignoring 
representations  from the Congress-I on weaker  sections  housing 
programme, CMEF and other developmental works.

Dr. Rajasekhara Reddy said some other Collectors also acted in  a 
manner subserving the interests of the ruling TDP, and MROs  were 
instructed  not to consider applications for enrolment of  voters 
from  the specific areas. He urged the State Election  Commission 
to look into these complaints.

He  demanded simultaneous elections to the Municipal  Corporation 
of Hyderabad and the nine municipalities around. The question  of 
adjustments  with  other  parties in the MCH  election  would  be 
considered after the election schedule was announced.
