
Wearing of helmets: HC sets aside single judge's order 


By Our Staff Reporter

KOCHI,  JAN.  25. A Division Bench of the Kerala  High  Court  on 
Tuesday  set aside a single judge's verdict directing  the  State 
Government and the Director General of Police (DGP) to  implement 
strictly  Sec.  129 of the Motor Vehicle Act, making  wearing  of 
helmets compulsory for two-wheeler riders and pillion riders.

The Bench comprising Dr. Justice A. R. Lakshmanan and Mr. Justice 
S.  Sankarasubban quashed the single judge's order on the  ground 
that  the  State  Government had not  amended  the  Kerala  Motor 
Vehicle  rules which prescribed the specification of helmets,  in 
response  to the 1994 amendment made to Sec. 129 by  the  Central 
Government.

The Centre had amended the Section as early as in November  1994. 
By  the amendment, it had been made clear that the  riders  shall 
wear  `the protective headgear conforming to the standard of  the 
Bureau  of  Indian  Standard'.  In  the  earlier  Act,  the  last 
sentence, `the protective headgear conforming to the standard  of 
the  Bureau  of Indian Standard (BIS)' was absent. It  only  said 
that  the rider could wear a protective headgear as specified  by 
the State Government by making rules in that behalf. However, the 
amendment  had  not been incorporated in Rule 347 of  the  Kerala 
Motor  Vehicle Rules. The rule said that the protective  headgear 
to be worn by the riders should be `of ISI standard'.

The  Bench pointed out that the State rule could not be  enforced 
in  view of the amendment to Sec. 129 of the Motor Vehicles  Act. 
The  State Government was now bound to follow the  specifications 
laid  down by the BIS for helmets. Since the writ petitions  were 
decided without noting the changes made to Sec. 129 of the Act by 
the  single  judge,  the  court had  ``no  other  option  but  to 
interfere with the judgment''.

The single judge's directions would `amount to confirming of rule 
347 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules', the court said.

The Judges, however, made it clear that the dismissal of the writ 
petitions for the enforcement of the helmet rule `will not  stand 
in  the  way  of  the  Government  in  enforcing  the   standards 
prescribed  by the BIS as envisaged under Sec. 129 of  the  Motor 
Vehicles Act'.

The  court  said  the petitioners reserved the right  to  file  a 
properly framed writ petition in the light of the provisions  now 
in force.

The  Bench  pointed out that the third provision to  the  amended 
Section  gives  the  State  Government  the  authority  to   make 
exemptions to the rule as it may think fit. 

Allowing  the writ appeal filed by the Kerala  Auto  Two-Wheelers 
Association,  Kochi, the judges said the  respondents,  including 
the  DGP, had not brought to the notice of the single  judge  the 
amendment to the Act.

The  court  said  that neither counsel  for  the  petitioner  nor 
counsel for the respondents was in a position to place before the 
Bench any material with regard to the standards prescribed by the 
BIS for helmets.

The  Bench noted that even in the counter affidavit of Mr. B.  S. 
Sastri, DGP, there was only reference to the non-amended Section. 
According  to  him, not many helmets of ISI  specifications  were 
available  during  1992- 93 and that there was no  provision  for 
keeping  the helmet after parking the vehicle itself `under  lock 
and  key'. He had said the climate of Kerala with  high  humidity 
and frequent rain `makes the use of helmets a little  difficult'. 
The  DGP had said there was `no gainsaying the fact that the  use 
of  helmets  will  reduce  the incident  of  fatalities  in  road 
accidents   involving  two-wheelers'.  A  time-bound   programme, 
including  a  campaign,  provision of  parking  slot  and  making 
available  the  required number of ISI helmets  followed  by  the 
enforcement would be `desirable and necessary'.
