
AICTE to sign Washington Accord shortly 


By Our staff reporter

TIRUVANNAMALAI,  JAN.25.  The  All India  Council  for  Technical 
Education (AICTE) would soon be signing the Washington Accord  on 
mutual  recognition  of  the  courses  offered  by  the   various 
technical  educational  institutions  in  the  member  countries, 
according to Dr.R.S.Nirjar, Member Secretary of the AICTE.

Delivering  the  valedictory  address  of  the  two-day  National 
Seminar  on  `Electronics-Advances and Trends' organised  by  the 
Arunai  Engineering College (AEC) near Tiruvannamalai on  Monday, 
Dr.Nirjar  said that the signing of the Washington  Accord  would 
pave  the way for recognition of India's accreditation  programme 
for technical courses in all the countries which were members  of 
the Accord.

This  would mean that the courses accredited by the AICTE in  the 
various technical institutions in the country would be recognised 
by all countries which were the members of the Accord.

He said that the council has changed the pattern of approval  for 
new  engineering colleges in such a way as to slow down the  pace 
at  which self-financing engineering colleges (SFECs) were  being 
started all over the country. The number of SFECs was  increasing 
in a hyperbolic equation.

Keeping  this in mind, the AICTE would change the procedures  for 
accreditation  and  the  rules governing  the  intake  by  laying 
greater stress on academic parameters to qualify for  eligibility 
to accreditation. 

The exercise was aimed at encouraging good ventures and  stopping 
commercial ventures in the starting of SFECs, he said.

Dr.N.Balakrishnan,  chairman, Super Computer  Education  Research 
Centre, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore who delivered  the 
presidential   address  said  that  due  to   the   communication 
revolution  that  was taking place in India and the rest  of  the 
world,  he foresaw in the future a situation in India  where  the 
people  would  be  walking with a system with  which  they  could 
access any information from any part of the world.

Instead  of the students going to the library, the library  would 
come  to them in a few years. The traditional system  of  writing 
examinations  on a fixed date would even give way to  a  flexible 
system  wherein one could write an examination on any day of  his 
choice after perfectly studying all the subjects. 

This   system  would  produce  fully  qualified   and   competent 
professionals, he said.

Mr.R.Sankar,   project  manager,  Combat  Vehicle  Research   and 
Development  Establishment (CVRDE), Ministry of Defence,  Chennai 
who   delivered  a  special  address  said  that  the  scope   of 
electronics in defence was increasing by leaps and bounds to such 
an extent that the future warfare would be electronic-intensive. 

The  advent of powerful digital processors, databases,  synthetic 
display  and artificial intelligence in the cockpit  promises  to 
revolutionise military aviation.

Dramatic  revolution  in air-borne radar and  electronic  warfare 
systems and electro-optic sensors have made them key elements  of 
modern fighter aircraft. 

These operations make special demands on telemetry,  telecommand, 
secure data link, navigation and mission sensors, he said. 

Dr.A.Madhiazhagan, former Professor of Anna University said  that 
the  advent  of the microprocessor has multiplied the  impact  of 
electronics on our daily life.

Mr.E.V.Velu,   chairman   of   AEC   welcomed   the    gathering. 
Dr.R.S.Naagarazan, principal, AEC said that the B.E.  (Mechanical 
Engineering),  B.E. (Electrical and Electronics Engineering)  and 
B.E.  (Computer Science and Engineering) courses offered  by  the 
AEC  have  been accredited by the AICTE, while  accreditation  is 
awaited for the B.E. (Electronics and Communication  Engineering) 
and MCA courses.
