
TMC alleges 'irregularities' in purchase of water tanks 


By Our Staff Reporter

CHENNAI,  JAN.25.  The  TMC has  alleged  irregularities  in  the 
Chennai  Metrowater's  (CMWSSB) purchase of water  tanks  from  a 
private  company  as  also in the ``mineral  water''  project  of 
CMWSSB.

In a statement issued today, Mr S.R. Balasubramaniam, a member of 
the  TMC Political Affairs Committee and former  Union  Minister, 
demanded  that  the State Government order an  enquiry  into  the 
matter  to bring out the truth and ensure that such mistakes  did 
not recur.

On the purchase of plastic water tanks, he said the bids for  200 
numbers  of the tanks were floated last year and a  decision  was 
taken  that  two-thirds of the tanks would be procured  from  the 
lowest bidder and the rest from those who were willing to  supply 
the tanks at the rates quoted by the lowest bidder.

However, contrary to the decision, all the 200 tanks were  bought 
from one particular company. 

The  other bidders not only objected to this but also  complained 
that the quality of the tanks supplied was poor.

Subsequently, the issue was referred to the Central Institute  of 
Plastics Engineering and Technology, which studied the quality of 
the tanks and submitted a report. 

According  to the report, Mr.Balasubramaniam said, the weight  of 
3,000-litre-  capacity tanks should be 96 kg but, in the case  of 
the  tanks supplied, it was 80 kg. Besides, the thickness of  the 
tanks' wall was 6.8 mm against the specified level of 8.8 mm.

``This  demonstrated  clearly that the tanks were  not  upto  the 
prescribed  standards'',  he said, wondering whether  action  had 
been taken against the supplier and those responsible for causing 
loss to Metrowater.

He  added  that according to his information,  steps  were  being 
taken to buy 1,000 more tanks from the same company.

Referring to the recently launched ``mineral water'' project,  he 
said at a time when Chennai was reeling under water scarcity much 
before the arrival of summer, Metrowater had gone in for a scheme 
of selling packaged drinking water.

The  former  Union Minister said ``undue concessions''  had  been 
shown to a corporate firm, in the matter of issue of licence.

Contending that the drinking water position in and around Chennai  
had  become  precarious, he said the storage  of  the  reservoirs 
feeding  water to the city was poor and the Satyamurthi Sagar  in 
Poondi, the principal source of supply, became dry.

On  getting Krishna water for Chennai, the former Union  Minister 
said the Government had not yet given proper answers to questions 
why precautionary steps had not been taken.

``All the measures announced by the State Government to tide over 
the  situation have remained only on paper'', Mr  Balasubramanian 
added. 
