
Seat allotment: Tough going for parties 


By Our Staff Correspondent

PATNA,  JAN.  25. Distribution of ticket for the first  phase  of 
elections  in  Bihar  turned out to be a  tough  task  for  major 
political parties, indicating that things could be much worse  as 
the deadline for the final two phases draws closer.

Things have been bad for the NDA because its constituents  failed 
to  reach an understanding on the distribution of ticket for  the 
108  seats  going  to polls in the first phase  on  February  12. 
Though  the last date for withdrawal is January 27 and  there  is 
still time for the constituents to resolve the impasse, the delay 
has created confusion within the party leadership and  especially 
the rank and file.

According  to  sources,  the  BJP  has  allotted  symbols  to  85 
candidates, while 42 candidates of the Samata Party had submitted 
symbols along with their nomination papers. The JD(U) has  issued 
32  symbols  and  BPP, which has threatened to pull  out  of  the 
alliance,   has  decided  to  contest  at  least  11   of   these 
constituencies.

As  a matter of fact, the three allies have jointly put  up  more 
candidates  than the BJP itself. Even if these parties decide  on 
who  should contest which seat, the delay threatens to give  room 
for a fresh row and dispute in case some of the nominees  decline 
to abide by their party's decision. Leaders of these constituents 
also  fear  revolt from such hopefuls and in case  they  withdraw 
from the fray, their support could not be taken for granted.

The  BJP,  however, has a greater problem. It  has  incurred  the 
wrath  of  aspirants  and workers both here  and  at  Ranchi.  At 
Ranchi,  problem arose because it denied tickets to  two  sitting 
MLAs  and retained two others. While the supporters of  two  MLAs 
were  up in arms, workers opposed to the other two MLAs who  were 
fortunate to secure ticket gave vent to their ire.

The  result  was the ransacking of the BJP office  at  Ranchi  in 
which  property  worth  about Rs. 1 lakh was  destroyed  and  the 
police  had  to  be called in to  restore  normalcy.  The  police 
imposed prohibitory orders within the party premises.

The  scene was the same at the BJP office here with a former  MLA 
`making   his   presence  felt'.  Other  workers   prevailed   in 
controlling  his  anger.  In any case one of its  MLAs,  who  was 
denied  ticket  has  revolted deciding  to  contest  the  Danapur 
constituency as an independent.

The situation is the same with the RJD which denied ticket to  as 
many  as eight legislators including four Ministers, two of  whom 
put  in their papers in protest. One of them actually joined  the  
BJP. Workers of the party also gheraoed the spokesman over denial 
of  ticket  to a minority from Patna  Central  constituency.  The 
police  arrived at the scene, but senior leaders  intervened  and 
saved the situation.

The Congress(I) too is facing a similar problem. The leaders here 
charged  that weightage was not given to the  recommendations  of 
the  district  and the state committees and that names  had  been 
imposed  from  the  top  with respect to  at  least  a  score  of 
constituencies.

Dr.  Vijay Kumar Singh, the nephew of the former Chief  Minister, 
Mr. S. N. Singh, whose daughter-in-law won from Aurangabad ticket 
as a Congress(I) nominee has decided to contest as an independent 
from  Rafiganj.  Several senior leaders have been  denied  ticket 
while the CLP leader, Mr. Ramashray Prasad Singh, was heckled  by 
a  section  of the crowd as he proceeded to fild  his  nomination 
from Konch.
