
Engagement, not containment 


By Malini Parthasarathy

TO  THOSE who view India-Pakistan relations as a zero- sum  game, 
the  fact  that the world's leading powers including  the  United 
States  appear to view the present military regime  in  Islamabad 
with  distinct  disfavour and have begun to endorse  New  Delhi's 
suspicions  in  regard  to its sponsorship of  terrorism  in  the 
region, is another feather in the cap for India's diplomacy. Such 
a reading of the regional situation which banks on the  isolation 
of  Pakistan in the global arena may yield short-term  diplomatic 
satisfaction but in the long-run, this complacent approach  would 
only  put further pressure on the ground situation in the  region 
and  could also narrow India's diplomatic and  strategic  options 
sharply.

There is no doubt that all the elements in the current situation, 
most  particularly  the  fact that  Pakistan  today  presents  an 
incontrovertible  picture of serious instability and  volatility, 
have  added  up to swing the pendulum of global  opinion  towards 
India  in the ongoing propaganda war between the  two  countries. 
These  are  indeed  tempting times for Indian  diplomacy.  It  is 
indeed all too easy to set aside the harder and more  challenging 
task  of  embarking step by step upon a comprehensive  course  of 
reconciliation  and  instead  rely  entirely  on  a  strategy  of 
``containing'' Pakistan. It can certainly be convincingly  argued 
that  the prospects for a constructive and productive  engagement 
of  Pakistan do not appear very promising given that the  context 
of the bilateral relationship has deteriorated sharply since  the 
October coup in Pakistan and the Army takeover. But it is yet  to 
be  satisfactorily demonstrated by those who dismiss the  present 
regime  in Islamabad as an untrustworthy interlocutor,  that  the 
strategy  of  ``containment''  does  not  have  high  diplomatic, 
security and political costs. It is also not clear as to  whether 
India  can  really  absorb these costs in the  long  run  without 
substantial damage to its own credibility in the global arena and 
its authority within.

This is not to suggest that India turn a blind eye to the factors 
that  are  certainly  deterrents in the pursuit of  a  policy  of 
constructive  engagement of the military-political  establishment 
that runs Pakistan today. What are the deterrents? First,  Indian 
diplomacy  is  still to recover from and come to terms  with  the 
shock that it sustained when the peace process that was under way 
with  Pakistan, manifesting in the Lahore Agreement  of  February 
1999, was summarily abrogated by the eruption of conflict on  the 
Kargil  heights. The peace process appeared to have lost  further 
relevance when the Nawaz Sharif Government was overthrown and the 
Army  took  over,  last October. It did appear  that  the  regime 
headed by General Pervez Musharraf set little store by the Lahore 
Agreement.  That the sanctity of the Lahore Agreement,  with  its 
considerable  promise of a substantive engagement on  contentious  
issues  such as the Kashmir dispute, as a  predecessor  document, 
the  agreement  of the two Foreign Secretaries in June  1997  had 
also  entailed, was not upheld by the Musharraf-led  regime,  did 
lead  to doubts in New Delhi as to the utility of  contacts  with 
Islamabad's  new  leaders.  Second, of course,  was  the  natural 
repugnance  that surfaced in regard to the idea of having  to  do 
business  with a military government that had ended 14  years  of 
democracy  in  Pakistan.  It was also feared  that  the  Pakistan 
military  establishment which had directed the  Kargil  operation 
would be disinclined to continue with the peace process that  had 
after  all  greater  momentum and resonance under  the  aegis  of 
democratic governments such as that of Ms. Benazir Bhutto and Mr. 
Nawaz Sharif.

The recent spurt in terrorist activity in the Kashmir Valley  and 
the  traumatic  episode of the hijacking of the  Indian  Airlines 
flight  from Kathmandu in late December which culminated  in  the 
Government  having to capitulate to the demand to  release  three 
militants  with  links  to terrorist organisations  such  as  the 
Harkat-ul-Mujahadeen   have  been  seen  as  clear  evidence   of 
Pakistan's  sponsorship  of terrorism against India.  Hence,  the 
initial  disinclination  to deal with the  Musharraf  regime  was 
reinforced  by this perception. While these considerations  might 
naturally  colour New Delhi's sense of unease in relation to  the 
Musharraf-led regime in Islamabad, it will be a mistake to  allow 
this  sense of distrust to overwhelm the requirement to pursue  a 
more realistic and less confrontational policy towards Islamabad. 
It  would also be extremely short-sighted to ignore  the  nuances 
that are emerging in the bilateral and the international context. 
The  Vajpayee  administration's  post-Kargil  and   post-Kandahar 
policy  approach to Pakistan makes no secret of the fact that  it 
hinges solely on a strategy of containment of Pakistan.

A more subtle and nuanced diplomatic approach would contain  more 
than  one  track. As for the issue of regional  terrorism,  India 
does  have  the satisfaction of knowing that  global  opinion  is 
gradually  consolidating  in  favour  of  India's  argument  that 
Pakistani  territory is becoming a base for  dangerous  terrorist 
activity.  During  his  recent  visit  to  Islamabad,  the   U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State, Mr. Karl F. Inderfurth, made  plain 
his country's disapproval of Pakistan's failure to crack down  on 
the  terrorist  groups operating there. ``We believe,''  he  said 
pointedly,  ``that  the presence and activities of  these  groups 
gives  Pakistan  a  bad international  reputation  in  the  world 
community.'' Such an acknowledgment by the United States would of 
course be a vindication of oft- repeated Indian arguments and  in 
that  sense, a welcome recognition of India's own predicament  in 
the Kashmir Valley. But to predicate the entire context of India-
Pakistan relations on the single issue of Pakistan's support  for 
terrorism  in the Valley, would be to shut the window on  several 
promising openings that could in themselves lead to a qualitative 
change in the presently strained bilateral context.

India's   current   diplomatic  strategy  to   isolate   Pakistan 
internationally  depends  to  a large degree on  the  ability  to  
persuade and coopt the United States and the other global  powers 
to endorse this characterisation and subsequently act  punitively 
towards Pakistan. Not only does such an approach reduce India  to 
a  position of virtually abject dependence on the  United  States 
sharing its strategic view of the region, but it also  constricts 
the diplomatic space within the region for India to make its  own 
autonomous  decisions  in  regard  to  relations  with  its   own 
neighbours.  Thus,  a  strategic  focus  on  the  containment  of 
Pakistan requires an endorsement from the world's leading players 
and that in itself is harmful to India's foreign policy interests 
in  the  long run. While there is no question that  the  Vajpayee 
administration  will  have  to  seek  categorical  and   credible 
assurances from Pakistan that it will not support terrorist  acts 
against  the Indian state and people, it is important  that  such 
messages  to Islamabad are delivered directly and not by  relying 
on  the  global powers to endorse India's  position  and  thereby 
securing a worldwide indictment of Pakistan.

The  reluctance to start a dialogue with the Musharraf regime  on 
the  ground  that  it is not a democratic  dispensation  and  the 
continued ignoring of the conciliatory signals that emanate  from 
Islamabad  would only serve to harden the regime's public  stance 
against improving ties with India. In his conversation with  this 
writer  (published  on January 17), Pakistan's  Chief  Executive, 
General  Pervez Musharraf, did sound several conciliatory  notes. 
He made clear that he was not insisting that the Kashmir  dispute 
be  discussed  before  any other issue, but  was  firm  that  the 
dispute  itself ought to be substantively addressed. In  essence, 
General  Musharraf's  position on the Kashmir issue  varied  very 
little  from  the positions taken by Ms. Benazir Bhutto  and  Mr. 
Nawaz Sharif in regard to this issue. The other significant point 
emerging from General Musharraf's remarks was that he did not  at 
all  repudiate the idea of bilateral diplomacy and did  not  once 
suggest  that since bilateralism had failed, only a  multilateral 
initiative   would  work,  as  his  predecessors  had   sometimes 
suggested. It was evident during the course of the interview that 
General  Musharraf  did  want  to  be  taken  seriously  as   the 
interlocutor for Pakistan by the Vajpayee administration.

The  current  diplomatic and strategic course that  the  Vajpayee 
Government seems to prefer, which is to avoid an engagement  with 
the military regime in Pakistan and to rely mainly on a  campaign 
to  isolate  Pakistan,  is likely to  have  high  diplomatic  and 
strategic  costs.  The public pronouncements by  members  of  the 
Vajpayee administration, including the dangerous and  provocative 
unveiling  of  a new doctrine of ``limited war'' by  the  Defence 
Minister,  Mr. George Fernandes, would only inject fresh  tension 
into  the  strained atmosphere that prevails  between  India  and 
Pakistan.  Nobody  would question the emphasis  being  placed  on 
sharpening  the counter-terrorist strategies required  to  combat 
terrorism  in  the  Kashmir  Valley  and  the  legitimate  Indian 
insistence  that  Pakistan  end  its  support  for   cross-border 
terrorism.  But  the time has come to take another  look  at  the 
policy approach to Pakistan and to question the premises on which 
it is presently predicated. An approach to Pakistan must  consist  
of several strands, including a recognition that an engagement of 
the  military  regime  in Islamabad  is  perhaps  inevitable.  An 
engagement  of  Pakistan's  ruling establishment  does  not  mean 
abandoning  India's  reservations  or  even  wariness  about  the 
Musharraf  regime's  strategies. Going down the other road  of  a 
strategy  of  containment entails much higher costs  and  is  far 
riskier. 
