
Doubts over anti-missile system


THE  FAILURE OF its Anti-Ballistic Missile System (ABM) to hit  a 
speeding  warhead  high over the Pacific Ocean  should  have  its 
lessons for the U.S. Defence Department which might have presumed 
that such a test was wholly routine and it would not have had any 
doubts   about  its  being  successful.  The  projected   missile 
interception  had  not  materialised in a third  test  though  an 
earlier  anti-missile launch had succeeded in hitting  a  similar 
warhead.  This is a clear indication that where  highly  advanced 
electronic technology is involved, requiring checks for  ensuring 
hundred per cent flawless performance of all the inputs prior  to 
every  launch, there is no question of success turning out to  be 
repeatable.  This  becomes clear from the  Pentagon's  disclosure 
that  there had been technical problems associated with the  test 
which  had  become  more difficult because of its  having  to  be 
integrated with the ground-based radars in Hawaii and  Kwajalein. 
If,  as  it appears, successive launching of the  missile  system 
requires  such  an integration with a global  radar  network,  it 
further compounds the uncertainties of missile launches.

The  Pentagon should be aware of the complexities thrown up by  a 
missile  system  having to depend upon ground-based  rather  than 
space-borne systems and which should prepare those entrusted with 
their  operations  for  a high failure rate.  Maj.  Gen.  Malcolm 
O'Neill,  Acting  Director of U.S. Strategic  Defence  Initiative 
Organization, while addressing an armed services sub-committee of 
the  U.S. Senate a few years ago, laid the emphasis  squarely  on 
the  acquisition  of improved ground-based missile  defence.  The 
failure  of  the  latest missile launch could  suggest  that  the 
ground-based  systems  have  not acquired  the  perfection  which 
should  be  built  into it every time - which  implies  that  the 
performance of a widespread network of vendors to whom orders for 
crucial  components are farmed out is not wholly error-free.  The 
Pentagon  was  advised to give greater attention  to  space-based 
anti-missile  systems from 2000 onwards by which time  it  should 
have  built  more reliability  on  well-functioning  ground-based 
systems.  Space-based interceptors, even beyond 2004,  should  in 
fact   support  the  ground-based  interceptors.   The   Pentagon  
discovered  that  the U.S. casualties in Operation  Desert  Storm 
would have been less than 20 per cent of the total if it had  not 
had  to  depend  on a single, tactical  ballistic  missile.  This 
called  for a comprehensive review of the SDI programme  and  its 
relationship with the ABM treaty.

The  ABM  missile  system merits  attention  for  the  technology 
headway which the U.S. has made for ensuring that it stays  ahead 
with  the massive destructive capabilities it has built up to  be 
prepared for the wars it feels called upon to wage in the future. 
The  latest  failure of its intercept weapon to  hit  a  speeding 
missile  could  convey to the Pentagon a message which  could  be 
very  disquieting  to the rest of the world. If it  gives  out  a 
warning  that  a  certain percentage of such  weapons  in  stock, 
however small, is likely to fail, the U.S. could decide on build-
up of a stockpile large enough to ensure that nothing is left  to 
chance when a contingency perceived by the Pentagon as  requiring 
their deployment arises in future. The response to any such  move 
by the U.S. from countries which do not feel wholly comforted  by 
the  end  of  the  Cold  War  would  be  to  fortify   themselves 
adequately. There are already indications that Russia is  already 
very  much disturbed by the U.S. becoming more hostile after  the 
inclusion of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic in the  NATO. 
A  21-page document published by Russia states very bluntly  that 
it  would  even  consider using nuclear  weapons  and  calls  for 
stepping  up  Moscow's defence preparedness.  Washington  should, 
therefore, keep in mind the responses which an offensive military 
strategy could provoke.
