
Sombre thoughts on R-Day 


By Inder Malhotra

Having  reported the inauguration of the republic  half-a-century 
ago and followed its fortunes since then, I can recall only three 
occasions when Republic Day was celebrated amidst so much anxiety 
and  concern  as  today, on its golden  jubilee.  The  gargantuan 
security  arrangements made to safeguard the  spectacular  parade 
and pageantry from vile acts of terrorism, sponsored from  across 
the border, speak for themselves.

To  be  sure, things are not even remotely as traumatic  as  they 
were on January 26, 1963 in the immediate aftermath of the  brief 
but brutal border war with China. Nor is the present mood half as 
sombre as that which prevailed in 1984 when events in Punjab were 
moving  inexorably towards the tragedy of Operation Blue Star.  A 
year later, the republic's anniversary was clouded by memories of 
Indira Gandhi's assassination and of the horrific anti-Sikh riots 
that  followed,  and even more by the catastrophic  gas  leak  at 
Bhopal.

Even  so,  it will be unwise to underestimate or  play  down  the 
gravity  of  the challenges that the republic  faces.  The  worst 
stems  from  the manifest determination  of  Pakistan's  military 
regime,  headed  by General Pervez Musharraf, to up the  ante  in 
Kashmir  and thus heighten tensions, on the one hand, and  spread 
murder  and mayhem in other parts of India, through a network  of 
agents,  on  the  other. Nor can the gnawing  worries  about  the 
ineptitude  of  the Indian state and society be  overlooked.  The 
famous victory in Kargil is now history. What haunts most  people 
is Kandahar.

Mercifully, there is no inclination on the part of South Block to 
dismiss Gen. Musharraf's threat of ``teaching a lesson'' to  this 
country  as mere ranting of a military ruler in a hot  seat.  His 
message  to  India  has been menacing from the word  go,  as  was 
underscored  by his interview with this newspaper. Since then  he 
has reinforced his words with deeds. To attack an Indian military 
post  near Akhnoor (whenever Pakistan rulers have been  hell-bent 
on conflict they have headed for this highly strategic area),  to 
blame this country for having crossed the LoC, and to call on the 
U.N.  Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to  ``intervene''  gives 
his  game  away.  That  the  bodies  of  six  Pakistani  military 
personnel  are lying in Indian territory makes nonsense  of  Gen. 
Musharraf's  claim. But to a country that doesn't even claim  the 
remains of its dead, this does not matter.

Evidently, the self-appointed Chief Executive feels encouraged by 
the  unusually  warm welcome he got during his  recent  visit  to 
China  and  by the firm decision of the United States  to  remain 
closely  engaged  with  the Musharraf regime.  The  overthrow  of 
democracy is disapproved of only in the case of Myanmar and  even  
Pakistani encouragement to terrorism can be overlooked as long as 
Americans are not targeted.

Gen. Musharraf is playing with fire, of course. But evidently  he 
is  convinced  that  the nuclear  standoff  in  the  subcontinent 
enables  him  to be as aggressive in Kashmir as he  wants  to  be 
because India would not be in a position to retaliate for fear of 
any  conflict  escalating  into  a  nuclear  exchange.  Pakistani 
capacity  to  persist in absurd beliefs  seems  infinite.  ``Four 
Wars, One Assumption'' is the title of a series of articles by  a 
respected Pakistani commentator, Mr. Altaf Gauhar, who was Field-
Marshal Ayub's Man Friday. From the first invasion of Kashmir  in 
1947  to Kargil 1999, he says, the unshaken Pakistani  assumption 
was that ``Indians won't fight''.

It  is  in  this context that the Defence  Minister,  Mr.  George 
Fernandes,  has bluntly told Pakistan that nuclear  weapons  have 
not  made  conventional  wars obsolete  and  that  any  Pakistani 
provocation  would be met adequately. The warning was  necessary. 
But Islamabad would surely use it to invite foreign intervention, 
mediation or ``facilitation'' in Kashmir with the usual scare  of 
a ``nuclear flashpoint'' for which there are quite a few takers.

Ironically,  the rising tension and the escalating war  of  words 
between  India and Pakistan have got mixed up with  the  proposed 
visit  to this country of the U.S. President, Mr.  Bill  Clinton. 
New  Delhi  has told Washington that a  Presidential  visit  that 
includes Pakistan would not be liked here. For its part, Pakistan 
has  taken  vigorous steps to ensure that Mr.  Clinton  does  not 
bypass it while travelling to South Asia. It has even promised to 
sign  the CTBT, so dear to Mr. Clinton, regardless of what  India 
does.

Under  these  circumstances, a visit by Mr. Clinton  confined  to 
India  and  Bangladesh appears extremely unlikely, to put  it  no 
more  strongly than that. Meanwhile, the discussion on  the  CTBT 
has  been muddied by an inexplicable lack of transparency on  the 
part  of  New  Delhi and  Washington's  shocking  propensity  for 
speaking in different voices.

Mr.  Jaswant Singh's interlocutor, Mr. Strobe Talbott, says  that 
while he would like India to forgo nuclear weapons, it is India's 
sovereign right to have a nuclear deterrent. But his remarks have 
been followed by a strident declaration by Mr. John Holum, honcho 
of  America's  Arms  Control and  Disarmament  set-up,  that  his 
country  would  ``strip  India of nuclear weapons.''  No  one  in 
authority in the U.S. has contradicted him.
