
Reforms in the States - III 


By Nirupam Bajpai and Jeffrey D. Sachs

THE   KARNATAKA  Government  has  been  pursuing  a   progressive 
industrial   policy  and  provides  an  attractive   package   of 
incentives and concessions. The package was formulated keeping in 
view the liberalisation of industrial and trade policy  initiated 
by  the Government of India in July 1991. Karnataka's policy  has 
been  in  operation  for  several years  now  and  has  attracted 
substantial   investment   flows  in   the   industrial   sector. 
Improvement of transport and communication links, water and power 
supply,  effluent treatment, and development of  human  resources 
are  some  of  the key areas of  the  State  Government's  focus. 
Private  sector initiative for development of  infrastructure  in 
areas  such  as power generation,  express  highways,  industrial 
parks and townships, airports and ports is being encouraged.

In  Maharashtra, the Government launched the New Industry,  Trade 
and  Commerce  Policy,  1995.  Its  guiding  principles  are  the 
integration  of  different sectoral development  schemes  into  a 
cohesive  plan  for overall development and the  evolution  of  a 
common  and transparent framework of governance.  The  Government 
has  recognised  that  for  any  large  development  activity  to 
succeed, participation of the private sector is imperative. It is 
only through private initiative that the necessary financial  and 
technical   resources  necessary  for   large-scale   development 
activity  can  be mobilised. The policy has therefore  sought  to 
accentuate  the  role of the private sector  in  development  and 
shift  the  Government's  role to providing  support  to  private 
sector initiatives.

The  Government  of Tamil Nadu has followed a  very  liberal  and 
pragmatic  industrial  policy  and hence  the  State  is  rapidly 
attracting large numbers of foreign and domestic firms. The State 
has  moved  to  third  place  in  its  bid  to  attract   foreign 
investment.  Between August 1991 and January 1997, FDI  approvals 
in  Tamil  Nadu involved Rs.54.7 billions in  812  projects.  And 
given its favourable industrial climate, Tamil Nadu's  importance 
as an investment destination will continue. The success  achieved 
so  far is largely due to the fact that the State Government  has 
been  focussing  on  strengthening  its  industrial  and   social 
infrastructure.  Among  these  are  measures  to  augment   power 
generation,    streamline    transmission    and     distribution 
arrangements,   improve   road  and  rail  networks,   bring   in 
technologically advanced telecom facilities, open new minor ports 
and  develop existing minor ports, and strengthen  the  technical 
training facilities. 

The State Government has given the single-window clearance system 
additional  powers  by  empowering the chief  executives  of  the 
various  industrial  complexes,  growth  centres  and  industrial 
estates in the public and private sectors to grant all clearances  
which  an  industry would require without the need to  go  around 
seeking   clearances   from   various   Government   departments. 
Additionally,  via  a  new  law,  The  Industrial  Township  Area 
Development  Authority  Act of 1997, the Government  has  granted 
powers  of  single-window clearance to an authority  in  case  of 
every  industrial township and industrial park.  Furthermore,  to 
speed  up  the  process of setting  up  private  industries,  the 
Government  has permitted them to go ahead with  construction  of 
factories  without waiting for the plan approval from  the  local 
body.  Acquisition of private land for major industrial  projects 
was  fraught  with  delays before The  Acquisition  of  Land  for 
Industrial  Purposes  Act  of  1997  was  passed  by  the   State 
Legislature.  As  expected,  this  has  resulted  in  speedy  and 
effective  land acquisition for large projects and  rule  abiding 
entrepreneurs  have gained in this process. These  measures  have 
made   Tamil  Nadu  more  investor-friendly  and  an   attractive 
destination for FDI and domestic private investment.

Building on the State's inherent advantages - large reservoir  of 
IT skills, low cost of living, investor-friendly public policies, 
better-than-average  infrastructure - the Tamil  Nadu  Government 
has  multiplied  efforts to attract foreign investment  into  the 
local  IT industry. In 1998, the State announced a  far-reaching, 
industry-friendly  IT  policy and set up a  State-level  IT  Task 
Force to implement it. All these efforts have paid off:  software 
exports have zoomed from nowhere to over $ 300 millions in  1998. 
The  State's ambitious target for IT hardware alone for the  year 
2002  is  set at $1.25 billions. If this target is  reached,  the 
region's  contribution  will represent about 30 per cent  of  the 
entire  Indian hardware production. A 1999 NASSCOM  Report  rates 
Chennai  as  the most favoured destination for  IT  companies  in 
India.  Three major factors have contributed to the emergence  of 
Tamil Nadu as one of the front-runners among Indian States. These 
are availability of relatively better all-round infrastructure as 
against other States; a well-established industrial culture and a 
fair  degree  of political stability as compared  to  most  other 
States. 

Haryana, Orissa, and West Bengal are in the intermediate-reformer 
category.  While  these States have not  undertaken  wide-ranging 
reforms,  they  have implemented a series of measures  that  have 
separated them from the others. Power sector reform, for example, 
is  an  area where Haryana and Orissa  have  undertaken  numerous 
steps.  In June 1997, the Haryana Assembly approved  the  Haryana 
Electricity  Reform  Bill  that  lays down  the  legal  basis  to 
establish an independent regulatory commission and to divide  the 
Haryana State Electricity Board (HSEB) into a generating company, 
a transmission company and a number of distribution companies.

Haryana's  power sector reform programme involves the  following: 
First,  structural  separation of generation,  transmission,  and 
distribution  into separate services to be provided  by  separate 
companies.  Second, incorporation of the new companies under  the 
Companies  Act. Third, privatisation of the distribution  system. 
Fourth,   private   sector  participation   in   generation   and  
transmission  utilities.  Fifth,  competitive  bidding  for   new 
generation.  Sixth,  development of an  autonomous  power  sector 
regulatory   agency.  Seventh,  supply  and  end-use   efficiency 
improvements  and  enhanced  environmental  protection.  Finally, 
reform   of   the  electricity  tariffs  at   the   bulk   power, 
transmission, and retail levels.

Orissa has been the leader in power sector reforms in India.  The 
State  Government  enacted  an  amendment  to  India's   national 
electricity Acts of 1910 and 1948: the Orissa Electricity  Reform 
Act,  which  became effective on April 1, 1996.  Subsequently  it 
established the Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission, India's 
first such.

(Concluded)
