
Threats to security 


COME  REPUBLIC  DAY, there seems to be a fresh alarm  and  a  red 
alert in Srinagar and in the national capital, New Delhi. It  has 
become  an  annual routine for militants to try and  disrupt  the 
Republic  Day celebrations in the valley, and possibly in  Delhi. 
But  this  year's attempt by Pakistan to attack  an  Indian  post 
across  the LoC in Akhnoor has raised fresh questions about  what 
lies  ahead.  At least 25 Pakistani soldiers have  been  reported 
killed  in this clash and heavy mortar shelling continues  across 
the  border. Islamabad has accused India of crossing the  LoC  to 
launch an attack, a charge that New Delhi has denied  vehemently. 
Added  to  this  serious exchange of fire,  are  the  reports  of 
several  seizures  in  Delhi of explosives,  timing  devices  and 
improvised  explosive  devices  in  the  run-up  to  January  26. 
Together,  these developments raised the level of  security.  The 
Delhi police have made significant seizures, but that may be just 
the  tip of the iceberg. There is no saying how  many  ``agents'' 
are  on  the prowl and what quantities of explosives  have  found 
their way to New Delhi or other centres. One thing is clear,  the 
threat  does  not  seem to fade and calls for a  high  degree  of 
constant alert to outwit the conspirators.

This  is  not the time for a war of words. Tensions  are  already 
running high on the borders. The security forces must maintain  a 
constant vigil along the LoC and be in a position to repulse  any 
attack from across the line. No intrusions must be allowed. It is 
clear  that  the Kashmiri militants and separatists,  along  with 
their sponsors, want to keep the focus on this issue to make it a 
flashpoint  in  South  Asia. They would obviously  like  to  draw 
international  attention to the Kashmir issue and try to  involve 
third parties in cooling the tensions. This is exactly what India 
wants  to  avoid  and  must  therefore  continue  to  show  great 
restraint,  without  compromising  on  security  or   territorial 
integrity. Now that the Subrahmanyam committee report is with the 
Centre  and  the problems and failures in Kargil must  have  been 
analysed,  the armed forces must plug the loopholes and evolve  a 
coordinated strategy to repulse any attack or threat. Field-level 
intelligence  needs  to be strengthened and the  village  defence 
committees  trained as well as equipped to meet any  contingency. 
All  this  will result in a burgeoning defence  budget,  but  the 
nation will not grudge any additional expenditure on this  score. 
Care  must  be  taken to protect the innocent  civilians  in  the 
border  areas  and plans evolved to cause minimum  disruption  to 
normal life.

The seizure of ``explosive toys'', which were reportedly smuggled 
in  the bus from Lahore, the arrest of suspected agents in  Delhi 
along  with RDX explosives and timing devices only  confirms  the 
fears  that this whole operation will be a continuing  affair.  A 
disaster  was averted just half an hour ahead of the final  dress 
rehearsal  of the Republic Day parade, when the  security  forces 
unearthed a device planted in a plastic jar on the lawns of India  
Gate.  A suspected agent was detained with more devices  and  RDX 
recovered  from his hideout in Karol Bagh. These demonstrate  the 
degree of infiltration and the network that is in place to create 
terror  on such important occasions. Events such as  Independence 
Day  and  Republic  Day cannot be scaled  down  because  of  such 
threats,  either in the States or in the national  capital.  That 
only  increases  the  pressure on the  police  and  the  security 
personnel   to  remain  vigilant  and  crack  down  on   anything 
suspicious. Eternal vigilance is the price the nation has to  pay 
to meet this constant threat to national security. The people too 
have  a duty - to remain alert and inform the authorities of  any 
suspicious activities in their area, besides cooperating with the 
police in the security drill.
