
Reflections on the Kerala model 


By S. Swaminathan

Developmental  patterns which have been systematised  by  Western 
economists  since  World War II have  generally  revolved  around 
capital flows, technology transfers, manufacturing facilities and 
trade   linkages.  In  more  recent  decades,  the   East   Asian 
``miracle''  economies  are  said to have added  a  critical  new 
dimension  of  human  resource development to  the  process  even 
though   the   first   round  of   applause   for   these   newly 
industrialising  economies  in the West (and  in  IMF-World  Bank 
circles) was evoked by their demonstrating, after the fashion  of 
Japan,  of the ``Export-led'' growth model. Nearer  home,  within 
India,  over  the  last  twenty  years,  a  unique  if   somewhat 
undramatic developmental model has been at work in Kerala even if 
seeming  paradoxes  have  caught the attention  of  analysts  and 
unabashed  detractors  more than  the  positive  transformational 
value  which  the  process has already imparted  to  millions  of 
people in the State.

The paradoxes

The  Kerala pattern of development, which can be described as  an 
amalgam  of conscious Marxist orientation of economic and  social 
policy and of pragmatic, and democratic responses on the part  of 
the   State  to  popular  or  proletarian  aspirations   and   to 
demographic  pressures, has clearly proved a pace-setter for  the 
whole  country.  That  it  has not  ushered  an  economy  without 
unemployment  or  that it has not prevailed  over  the  continued 
scepticism  of entrepreneurs about the wisdom of  trusting  their 
investments in a State characterised by turbulent trade  unionism 
till  recent times is not to be glossed over. But then given  the 
resource  endowments  of Kerala,  a  predominantly  manufacturing 
economy is verily out of the question nor is it realistic for the 
political  establishment in Kerala to seek to compete with  other 
States such as Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu or Karnataka in the matter 
of attracting NRI or other global investments. 

The  contradictions  between  high literacy  and  low  employment 
opportunities  within the State are as much due to  the  mismatch 
between  the educational curriculum and the occupational  profile 
of the economy as it is due to the constraints of the State  with 
regard  to  the whole gamut of requisites for rapid  expansion  - 
infrastructure, technology absorption, investment climate and  so 
forth. The current quest of Kerala to join the IT bandwagon could 
conceivably  put greater pressures on the human resources  factor 
further exposing the deficiencies of the well-developed system of 
general liberal education.

Notwithstanding  such  comments on the lopsidedness  of  the  so-
called  Kerala model (which could have proved disastrous but  for 
the emigration of over one million workers to the Gulf countries,  
other foreign lands and other States in India), the fact  remains 
that  the State has proved that in real terms of development  (of 
human resources), it has set up standards worthy of emulation  by 
other countries leave alone other States in India. Kerala is  way 
ahead  of  the  All-India  situation  with  respect  to  all  the 
indicators  of  human development -  life  expectancy,  literacy, 
infant  mortality  rate, death rate and birth rate,  as  well  as 
school enrollment.

Participative development process

The  uniqueness  of  the  Kerala  model  is  its  people-centred, 
decentralised,  need-based  approach to planning and  the  active 
involvement of the community in the implementation of social  and 
economic  welfare projects, regardless of party politics. Dr.  I. 
S.  Gulati, the renowned fiscal economist, who has been  steering 
the State's Planning Board with such singular clarity of mission, 
describes  the key principle of decentralisation as ``an  article 
of faith'' much more than a constitutional mandate and attributes 
the  pursuit  of  this  objective in the  State  to  the  vision, 
farsightedness  and  democratic commitment of the late E.  M.  S. 
Namboodripad.

It is a mindset which looks at decentralisation not as an  option 
but as the principal means for relating development to the people 
at the grassroots level. A State where about 37 per cent of  Plan 
resources are transferred to local bodies on the two criteria  of 
population  and  backwardness  has obviously  been  able  to  tap 
people's  energies much more effectively while other States  have 
been wallowing in arid debates about how much to decentralise and 
through  what modalities with political parties unwilling to  see 
development  as  nothing different from a ``sharing  of  spoils'' 
among themselves.

Coalition for development

Dr. Gulati's observations on how the paradigm of decentralisation 
has  worked  in Kerala deserve serious critical  reflection.  The 
view that in a highly politicised State, decentralisation of  the 
development  process  would only produce cock-pits  of  political 
rivalries is shown to be superficial. Dr. Gulati, in fact,  talks 
about  a vibrant synergy at the village level where  people  come 
together  through  various development projects. In quite  a  few 
backward  districts such as Malappuram, Kozhikode  and  Thrissur, 
the  involvement of local politicians regardless of  their  party 
loyalties in local developmental schemes is an amazing  testimony 
to a coalition of common interests which is in striking  contrast 
to  that which passes as a system of sharing of power  at  higher 
levels.

For  decentralisation to operate as a change-agent at  the  local 
level, a mere legislative process of delineation of authority for 
local  bodies  may not amount to much  without  active  financial 
devolution.  As Dr. Gulati describes it with  his  characteristic 
preference for understatement, wisdom, integrity and capabilities  
are  not all concentrated at the higher echelons of  the  polity. 
Given the opportunity, at the village and district levels, people 
do  rise  to the occasion. If this is not the crux of  the  whole 
debate on decentralisation, what else could it be?

The   Kerala  success  story  in  decentralised  planning  is   a 
continuing  affirmation  of what Prof. Madhu Dandavate  called  a 
Gandhian  approach  to  development. The  essence  of  the  whole 
approach  seems  to be what western developmental  analysts  have 
been  arguing for even with reference to the advanced  countries, 
namely  a  gradual  process  of  withdrawal  of  the  state  from 
activities  which belong to the people themselves. Kerala is,  by 
no means, moving towards ``the withering of the State'' nor to  a 
process of marketisation of public services. What is happening in 
Kerala  is a sustained process of empowerment of people which  is 
what  democracy is all about. Why should not the other States  in 
India  follow suit? As for Dr. Gulati, he seems to  believe  that 
the long-delayed transfer of Centrally-sponsored projects to  the 
States could serve as a critical trigger mechanism.
