
AIWA to take 5 p.c. stake in Baron


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 25. AIWA Company of Japan will take a  five  per 
cent  equity stake in Baron International to cement its  existing 
strategic  relationship.  The new alliance  will  offer  consumer 
electronics,  including  colour TVs, audio systems and  a  future 
range  of  Internet access equipment. Sony Corporation  of  Japan 
owns 50.6 per cent of AIWA. 

The  alliance formed in 1998, was originally for a term  of  five 
years,  ending  in 2003. In addition to equity  participation  by 
AIWA in Baron International, the strategic relationship has  been 
extended to another four years till 2007. This is the first  time 
that AIWA has extended a strategic alliance of this nature,  much 
before the conclusion of the original agreement. The  agreements, 
finalised in Tokyo last month, were signed here on Monday.

Further  the two companies will cooperate to develop a new  range 
of colour televisions for the Indian market. These would  include 
pure  flat televisions and plasma display panels. This  strategic 
alliance  will propel leading edge technologies in  entertainment 
electronics   with   a  focus  for  Internet   compliance   after 
identifying the technology needs of the Indian consumer.

Through  the  venture, AIWA and Baron aim to jointly  become  the 
undisputed  leader in the fast growing entertainment  electronics 
and Internet access equipment market in India. This was disclosed 
here on Monday at a joint press conference by representatives  of 
Baron and AIWA.

The   Baron  managing  director,  Mr.  Kabir  Mulchandani,   told 
newspersons that the joint venture would launch a new scheme next 
week  to  provide consumers colour televisions at  an  affordable 
price.  The  scheme would envisage a down payment of only  Re.  1 
initially  followed by instalments which could be as low  as  Rs. 
299 a month. At the same time, he assured that the company  would 
continue to provide the best technology to consumers.

According to the AIWA chairman, Mr. Kenji Tamiya, India is one of 
the  fastest growing markets in consumer  electronics  presenting 
AIWA  an  unprecedented  opportunity  to  provide  cutting   edge 
consumer   electronics  offerings.  He  said  the  audio   market 
worldwide  was estimated at $40 billion and the Japanese  company 
had  the  number  one  slot  in  areas  such  as  headphones  and 
accessories.  It  was also now number one in  the  audio  systems 
market in this country, he pointed out.

The Baron International chairperson, Ms. Shakun Mulchandani said, 
``Today's announcement is a key part of the overall strategy that 
Baron  has aggressively rolled out since last three  years.  This 
move  will  bring  enhanced  product  offerings  for  our  valued  
customers   in   the  exploding  consumer  electronics   and   IT 
marketplace. ''
