
SEBI allows net trading, clears corporate governance code


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 25. In two significant decisions, the  Securities 
and  Exchange  Board  of India (SEBI) today  allowed  trading  of 
shares  through the Internet and set a deadline for companies  to 
conform  to  norms for good corporate governance suggested  by  a 
committee headed by Mr. Kumar Mangalam Birla.

``We  decided  to allow net trading in stock market  and  it  can 
begin  without  the  cyber laws  with  investors  routing  orders 
through  brokers,''  said the SEBI chief, Mr. D. R. Mehta,  at  a 
news  conference  here  today.  The  implementation  in  case  of 
Internet trading regulations, corporate governance norms and  FII 
investment  would  wait  till the SEBI  consults  and  seeks  the 
approval  of  the Government, the Reserve Bank of India  and  the 
Department of Company Affairs (DCA), added Mr. Mehta.

Two other major decisions taken by the SEBI board, which met here 
today,  pertained  to in-principle approval to  certain  measures 
aimed  at promoting venture capital activity and  permitted  high 
net worth foreign individuals and corporates to invest in  Indian 
stock  markets. Both decisions are based on reports submitted  by 
committees set up for the purpose.

The  SEBI also allowed new companies to enter the primary  market 
provided venture capital funds took up 10 per cent of the equity. 
At  present  new  companies are allowed to  make  initial  public 
offerings  (IPOs) provided their projects have been appraised  by 
banks or financial institutions which also take up 10 per cent of 
the equity.

Mr.  Mehta said it was decided that Internet trading  could  take 
place in the country within the existing legal framework  through 
the  use of `order-routing' systems which would route order  from 
clients  to brokers for execution on registered stock  exchanges. 
The  board  also took note of the recommended  minimum  technical 
standards  for  ensuring  safety  and  security  of  transactions 
between  clients  and  brokers which would  be  enforced  by  the 
respective stock exchanges.

The  SEBI  also approved recommendations made by a  committee  on 
Internet  based  securities trading and services  for  developing 
regulatory parameters for use in Internet in securities  business 
and effective enforcement of Internet trading.

The  SEBI  decided  to  divide  the  norms  for  good   corporate 
governance  into  two sections -  recommendatory  and  mandatory. 
Since  many of the recommendations would be implemented by  other 
government  bodies,  they had been placed in  the  recommendatory 
category, explained Mr. Mehta.

A phased schedule has been drawn up for the corporate sector  for 
implementing    `mandatory'   recommendations    which    include 
composition of the board of directors, appointment and  structure 
of   audit  committees,  remuneration  of  directors'   interest, 
shareholders rights and disclosers regarding compliance level  of 
corporate governance in the annual report.

The  leading  A group companies - comprising  150  top  corporate 
houses  - should start implementing these measures from the  next 
fiscal and these should be mentioned in the annual report for the 
year  2000-01,  said Mr. Mehta. Listed companies with a  paid  up 
share capital of Rs. 10 crores and above or companies with a  net 
worth  of  Rs. 25 crores anytime in the history  of  the  company 
should  do so from the fiscal 2001-02. Companies having  paid  up 
capital  of  Rs. 3 crores and above should do so  from  the  next 
fiscal.

In   case  of  listed  entities  such  as  banks  and   financial 
institutions,  which  are incorporated under other  statues,  the 
recommendations  will  apply as far as they do  not  violate  the 
existing statues issued by the relevant regulatory authority.

Foreign corporates and individuals have been allowed to invest in 
the  capital  market through registered FIIs provided  the  total 
investment  does  not  exceed  five per  cent  of  the  concerned 
company's  total  capital  within  the  aggregate  limit  of  FII 
portfolio investment of 24 or 30 per cent, as the case may be.

On  easing  norms for venture capital funds, Mr. Mehta  said  the 
underlying  philosophy  was to cut down on  the  multiplicity  of 
agencies which dissuade venture investors by recommending a nodal 
agency,  designating  venture  capital  funds  as  mutual  funds, 
bringing  them under the SEBI ambit and ensuring quick entry  and 
exit  from companies by speeding up routine tasks such  as  stock 
evaluation.  The goal is to ensure investment of $10 billions  by 
venture capital funds over the next three to five years, said Mr. 
Mehta. The SEBI would like venture capital companies to be strong 
enough to absorb the failure rate of 80 per cent, he added.
