
Finance and development - which way now?


WHAT  has been our progress in financial sector reform  and  what 
are our achievements so far? In so far as the "arithmeticals"  of 
reform  in  the financial sector - to use a phrase  used  by  the 
Narasimham  Committee  - is concerned, significant  progress  has 
been made in the past few years. There has been a steady  decline 
in the level of resource preemption from the banking system. Both 
cash  reserve  ratio  and statutory  liquidity  ratio  have  been 
reduced from their high levels of 15 per cent and 38.5 per  cent, 
respectively,  in 1991-92 to nine per cent and 25 per  cent  now. 
Interest rates in various segments of financial markets have been 
deregulated  in a phased manner. This had preceded the  abolition 
of  control  on capital issues and freeing of  interest  rate  on 
private  bonds  and debentures. While  the  government  borrowing 
rates are now market determined, there has been a gradual phasing 
out  of  interest  rate subsidies  on  bank  loans.  Wide-ranging 
reforms have been initiated to develop and deepen the  government 
securities  market,  money  market, capital  market  and  foreign 
exchange  market.  The Bank Rate has  been  reactivated,  regular 
short-term Repos at a pre-announced rate are being conducted, and 
a  system  of prime lending rate has been introduced  to  provide 
direction to movement of interest rates in the credit market.

In  the sphere of external financial policy, while  the  exchange 
rate  is  market  determined, over the years, there  has  been  a 
progressive  liberalisation  of  foreign  direct  and   portfolio 
investment,  and  approval  procedures  have  been   considerably 
simplified.  As a result, there are now minimum  restrictions  on 
inflow  of  capital  into the economy, or  its  repatriation  and 
servicing. 

There  has  also  been a  significant  liberalisation  of  policy 
regarding  industry's  access  to foreign  equity  and  borrowing 
through  long term debt instruments. The banking sector has  been 
given  a greater degree of freedom with regard to  raising  funds 
abroad   and  managing  their  external  liability,  subject   to 
prudential guidelines. 

The  end  result  of all these and other  reforms  has  been  the 
growing integration among various segments of financial markets., 
closer  convergence  of Indian financial  system  with  practices 
prevailing  in  international  financial  markets,  and   greater 
opportunity   for   investors  to  access   both   domestic   and 
international  markets. At the same time, care has been taken  to 
avoid excessive short term external liability and asset-liability 
mismatches.

Competitive   condition   in  the  banking  industry   has   been 
facilitated  by relaxing entry and exit norms and permitting  the 
public  sector banks to raise additional capital from the  market 
(up to a certain level). While public sector banks continue to be 
predominant, the changing competitive environment in the  banking  
sector has made a significant difference to banking practices and 
disclosure requirements.

Prudential  regulation  and supervision have  formed  a  critical 
component  of  the financial sector reform programme.  India  has 
adopted international prudential norms and practices with  regard 
to capital adequacy, income recognition, provisioning requirement 
and  supervision. These norms have been  progressively  tightened 
over  the years, particularly against the backdrop of  the  Asian 
crisis.  Recently, the required capital adequacy ratio  has  been 
increased  to nine per cent, from eight per cent, in the  banking 
sector.  The mark to market practice for valuation of  government 
securities has been gradually enhanced from 30 per cent in  1992-
93 to 75 per cent by 1999-2000. Further refinement, in line  with 
international best practices, in valuation and classification  of 
investments  by  banks  is currently under  consideration.  As  a 
further prudential measure against credit and market risks,  risk 
weights  have  been  made  applicable  to  government  and  other 
securities to take account of price variations.

An attempt has also been made to avoid the problems arising  from 
"connected  lending". There have been regulations that limit  the 
exposure of individual banks and non-banking finance companies to 
any  particular  borrower  or  groups  of  borrowers.  There  are 
restrictions  on banking system's exposure to equity and  lending 
against  equity as collateral and its exposure to real estate  is 
limited. Prudent limits have been placed on the financial  system 
and  the  corporate  sector  as  far  as  external  borrowing  is 
concerned.

In   the  area  of  supervision,  a  full-fledged   institutional 
mechanism  has  been  developed keeping in view the  needs  of  a 
strong  and  stable  financial system.  The  system  of  off-site 
surveillance   has   been  combined   with   periodical   on-site 
supervision  for monitoring the risk profile of banks  and  their 
compliance with prudential guidelines. The Basle core  principles 
for effective banking supervision is substantially being  adhered 
to. A "CAMELS" based rating system for Indian banks has also been 
introduced.   The  Reserve  Bank's  regulatory  and   supervisory 
responsibility has been widened to include financial institutions 
and non-banking financial companies.

As  a  result of these and other measures, some progress  in  the 
performance  of  the  Indian banking system in  recent  years  is 
noticeable.  The trend in erosion of profit and capital base  has 
been reversed. Currently most of them are on the threshold of the 
prescribed  nine  per  cent ratio by  March  2000.  The  improved 
performance  has enabled most of the banks to meet their  capital 
requirement  from  internal  resources  and  the  market  without 
dependence on budgetary support.

The consolidation of financial system in the recent years has led 
to increased resilience of the Indian economy to external crisis. 
This  has been evident from the muted impact of the Asian  crisis 
on  the  Indian financial markets. Since then there  has  been  a  
constant  effort  to  enhance  the  regulatory  and   supervisory 
standards in conformity with international standards.

To  sum up, it is clear that, thanks to the guidance provided  by 
committees headed by Dr. Rangarajan and Mr. Narasimham, there has 
been  significant  progress in broadening  and  strengthening  of 
India's  financial  system.  The  task  is,  however,  far   from 
complete. Let us briefly look at some of the areas which  require 
priority consideration in the future.

The  agenda  for future is long. Fortunately, there  has  been  a 
widespread   interest  and  debate  among  experts   and   market 
participants  on  various aspects of financial reform  which  has 
enabled  India  to chart out a path which is best suited  to  our 
conditions.  Limitations of time - and of your patience - do  not 
permit  me  to cover the entire agenda for the  future.  I  will, 
therefore, confine myself to highlighting only a few areas which, 
in my view, deserve priority.

First and foremost, it is necessary to continue with the  process 
of strengthening our prudential, provisioning and  capitalisation 
norms  and bring them in line with best international  standards. 
It is equally important to continue with our efforts to introduce 
maximum  transparency,  disclosure, and  accountability  so  that 
investors and counter parties to financial transactions can  take 
their   decisions  based  on  full  information  and  their   own 
assessment  of  market  and  other  risks.  Tighter  and  tougher 
prudential  standards  will no doubt cause some pain  and  impose 
greater responsibility on banks and other financial institutions. 
However, as I mentioned before, given the new international focus 
and  externalities and linkages involved, the regulation  of  the 
financial  sector is no longer a matter of choice or a matter  of 
domestic concern alone. Over a period of time, it is likely  that 
the willingness of the rest of the world to do financial business 
-  either  by way of trade credits, direct investments  or  other 
types of investments and loans - will depend on their  confidence 
in our financial practices. India must remain ahead of the  curve 
in its prudential management.

The  level of non-performing assets (NPAs) of the banking  system 
in  India  has shown an improvement in recent years,  but  it  is 
still  too high. Part of the problem in resolving this  issue  is 
the  carry-over  of  old NPAs in  certain  declining  sectors  of 
industry.  The problem has been further complicated by  the  fact 
that there are a few banks which are fundamentally weak and where 
the  potential for return to profitability,  without  substantial 
restructuring,  is  doubtful. The Narasimham  Committee  and  the 
Verma Committee (which recently submitted its report) have looked 
into   the  problems  of  weak  banks  and  have   made   certain 
recommendations  which are under consideration of Government  and 
the  Reserve Bank India. These are also being widely debated,  so 
that  an  acceptable long-term solution can be  evolved.  Leaving 
aside  the problem of weak banks, in profitable banks  also,  the 
NPA  levels are still high. A vigorous effort has to be  made  by 
these  banks  to  strengthen  their  internal  control  and  risk  
management  systems,  and  to set up early  warning  signals  for 
timely  detection and action. The resolution of the  NPA  problem 
also  requires greater accountability on the part of  corporates, 
greater  disclosures  in the case of defaults, and  an  efficient 
credit information system. Action has been initiated in all these 
areas, and it is hoped that, with the help of stricter accounting 
and  prudential standards, the problem of NPAs in future will  be 
effectively contained.

The  problem  of  NPAs is also tied up with the  issue  of  legal 
reform.  This is an area which requires urgent  consideration  as 
the present system, involving substantial delays in arriving at a 
legal  solution of disputes, is simply not tenable. It  is  hoped 
that  recent  efforts, such as establishing  more  debt  recovery 
tribunals  and  setting up of settlement advisory  committees  in 
banks, would help. However, there is an urgent need to  institute 
a  proper legal framework to ensure expeditious recovery of  debt 
and  give  adequate  legal powers to  banks  to  effect  property 
transfers.  The  absence of quick and efficient system  of  legal 
redress constitutes an important "moral hazard" in the  financial 
sector as it encourages imprudent borrowing.

In  order to allow for growth in their assets in line  with  real 
growth  in  the economy, banks and financial  institutions  would 
need to increase their capitalisation quite substantially in  the 
next  few years. At present, the minimum shareholding by the  RBI 
in the State Bank of India, prescribed by legislation, is 55  per 
cent.  The  minimum percentage of shareholding by  Government  in 
public  sector banks is 51 per cent. So far, a number  of  strong 
banks  have  been able to access capital markets  to  meet  their 
capitalisation  requirements in line with prudential  guidelines. 
Some  of  these banks, including SBI, now have limited  scope  to 
raise further capital from the market within the prescribed floor 
of RBI and Government shareholdings. If the risk weighted  assets 
of these banks grow in line with the growth in the economy in the 
next  five years, additional capital requirements of these  banks 
may  exceed Rs. 10,000 crores. As against this  requirement,  the 
headroom  available  for these banks to raise  capital  from  the 
market  is  less  than  Rs.  1,000  crores.  After  allowing  for 
additional   infusion   of  reserve  capital   through   internal 
generation and access to subordinated debt, the gap between their 
additional capital requirement and the leeway available to  raise 
capital from the market will still remain quite sizeable.

In this situation, an issue that needs to be debated and resolved 
is whether this gap should be filled by contribution from the RBI 
(in the case of SBI) and Government (in the case of other  public 
sector  banks) or whether legislative ceiling for capital  to  be 
subscribed  by  the  public should be raised.  The  provision  of 
additional  capital  by  the  RBI  is  tantamount  to  additional 
monetisation,  and its monetary impact is equivalent to  that  of 
printing  additional currency. Contribution to banks' capital  by 
Government  has a similar effect as it will add  to  Government's 
deficit,  which  is already very high. Government, in  any  case, 
would need to provide additional capital to weak banks, which are  
not  in  a position to raise capital on their own. Does  it  make 
economic  or  fiscal  sense to add to  this  burden  further?  On 
balance,  there  seems  to  be a  strong  case  for  raising  the 
legislative ceiling for market participation in equity capital of 
public sector banks.

At the same time, it has to be recognised that in our  situation, 
particularly  in view of the need to give adequate  attention  to 
agricultural credit and rural banking as also to maintain  public 
confidence in the safety of banks, the public sector character of 
these banks should not be given up. Keeping these  considerations 
in  view,  that is, those of allowing greater access  to  markets 
while at the same time maintaining the public sector character of 
banks  presently owned by Government or the Reserve Bank, it  may 
be necessary to prescribe a maximum (at a suitably low level) for 
shareholding  by any single individual or a corporate  in  public 
sector banks. Government may also retain the pre-emptive right to 
appoint,  if it wishes, the Chief Executive and the  majority  of 
the Board members in public sector banks.

Over  the years, progressive liberalisation of financial  markets 
and  institutional reforms have led to growing inter-links  among 
various segments of financial markets. The emergence of different 
types  of  financial  intermediaries, in addition  to  banks  and 
financial  institutions, is healthy and desirable. A  diversified 
structure  contributes  to  greater stability  of  the  financial 
system in the event of unanticipated problems. Part of the reason 
why  problems in Japan's financial sector have persisted  for  so 
long  is  believed to be due to virtually  "Bank-only"  financial 
intermediation.  In  India,  while there  has  been  progress  in 
developing  various segments of the markets including  money  and 
debt  markets,  the depth of these markets remains  low  and  the 
volumes as well as number of participants are not very large.  An 
important  priority  for the future is to develop the  depth  and 
breadth   of   these  markets  and  to  allow   multiplicity   of 
intermediation  possibilities with different risks  and  leverage 
profiles.  RBI will continue to work with financial  experts  and 
market  participants  to develop an  appropriate  procedural  and 
policy framework to move in this direction.

We  also  have  to  devise measures to  make  our  interest  rate 
structure  more flexible in order to take account of  changes  in 
economic cycles and the inflation outlook.

While we must remain steadfast in our pursuit of financial sector 
reforms,  the success of this process should not be  viewed  from 
the  angle of how much freedom it allows to the  market  players. 
The  real  test is how much benefit all this brings in  terms  of 
development,  including  greater  employment  opportunities   and 
poverty  alleviation  for  those who do not  participate  in  the 
markets.  It  will  also be wrong to view  financial  reforms  as 
antithesis  of  Government's role in development or the  role  of 
public  policy in widening social choices and  opportunities.  In 
developing    countries,    with    massive    illiteracy     and 
underdevelopment  of infrastructure, Government will continue  to  
have  an  important and crucial role in  creating  the  necessary 
conditions  for  growth through investments in  areas,  such  as, 
education,  health, water supply, irrigation  and  infrastructure 
and the like. These and similar tasks cannot be fully taken  over 
by  the  market.  Successful financial  reforms  must  result  in 
strengthening the ability of governments to do what they need  to 
do  by  helping to generate higher growth,  higher  revenues  and 
higher  productivity.  In  developed  countries,  the   so-called 
"potential output" of the economy, whatever its estimated  level, 
can  be  left  to  be realised  by  changing  the  parameters  of 
financial and monetary policy. In developing countries, the  main 
challenge  is to raise the level of potential output by  removing 
the   constraints  of  infrastructure  and  low  human   resource 
development.

Which  way  now? Alongside financial reform  and  development  of 
markets, I would urge that the country's attention must also turn 
to  fiscal  empowerment of the state and  improvement  in  public 
administration.  With a revitalised fiscal situation and  further 
progress  in  establishing a forward looking, strong  and  stable 
financial  system, the first century of the next  millennium  can 
truly be a century of development.

Source: RBI January 2000 Bulletin

website: http://www.rbi.org.in
