
Showcasing auto industry capability


THE FIFTH Auto-Expo 2000 held in New Delhi from January 12-18 was 
Asia's largest show of its kind till date. The fair, covering  an 
area  of 65,000 sq. metres, attracted over one  million  visitors 
and business worth over Rs. 200 crores was transacted. A total of 
27  new  products  in  the four and  two  wheeler  segments  were 
launched  at  the  expo. Of these, 17  were  in  the  two-wheeler 
segment.

The  expo  was jointly organised by the Confederation  of  Indian 
Industry   (CII),   the   Automotive   Component    Manufacturers 
Association   (ACMA)  and  the  Society  of   Indian   Automobile 
Manufacturers (SIAM). 

Some  of  the  auto majors announced their future  plans  on  the 
occasion.  Daewoo Motors India (DMIL) will soon launch its  dual-
power  Cielo  with CNG and petrol options in the  Indian  market. 
According  to Mr. S. G. Awasthi, Managing Director,  DMIL,  ``The 
road  worthiness  tests of the CNG-fuelled engine on  Cielo  were 
completed recently and encouraged by the astounding results, DMIL 
has  decided  to introduce its CNG-run Cielo  in  the  commercial 
market to start with.''

The  state  owned  Maruti Udyog  Ltd.  (MUL)  conducted  consumer 
studies  at  the expo to test customer response to  a  number  of 
unlaunched  variants  and  models that  included  Baleno  diesel, 
Baleno  Station Wagon, CNG variant of Wagon-R and Esteem and  the 
Suzuki concept car - Kei. The Maruti pavilion displayed 20  cars, 
including Maruti 800, Omni, Gypsy, Zen, Esteem, Baleno and Wagon-
R.  In  addition, the range of vehicles from MUL's  Japanese  co-
promoter  Suzuki Motor Corporation (SMC) on display included  the 
Suzuki  Every electric vehicle, the grand Vitara, the Carry,  the 
Kei and the C2, a two-seater sports car.

General Motors India, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the U.S. based 
General  Motors, launched its latest mid-segment  offering,  Opel 
Corsa, with two engine variants and three trim levels. Dubbed  as 
India's  millennium  car,  the  new  car  will  be  available  in 
notchback  sedan  body style. The car will be  available  in  1.4 
litre  and 1.6 litre engines. The two 1.4 litre variants will  be 
known  as  1.4  GL and 1.4 GLS. The  ex-showroom  price  in  the 
capital for 1.4 GL without stereo will be Rs. 5.35 lakhs and with 
stereo Rs. 5.45 lakhs. Similarly, the 1.4 GLS is expected to cost 
Rs.  5.75 lakhs without stereo in Delhi and Rs. 5.85  lakhs  with 
stereo. The 1.6 GLS is priced at Rs. 6.39 lakhs without stereo in 
the  capital and will be Rs. 10,000 dearer with stereo.  Also  at 
the Opel stall a classic Opel Kapitan - a 1938 model car -  which 
was  well and faithfully restored was on display. This car  which 
was  restored by this author was well received by the public  and 
the media.

Ford  Motor unveiled three new Ikon models. All these models  are  
Euro-II compliant at launch.

Fiat  India Automobiles Ltd. (FIAL) launched another  version  of 
its mid-sized Siena, priced at Rs. 5.24 lakhs (Rs. 63,000 cheaper 
than the existing base model). The company will be launching  two 
more  models  -  Siena Weekender (a station wagon)  and  Uno  1.2 
(single point fuel injection, 61 horse power, 1200 cc and Euro II 
compliant  petrol  version) in April. Besides, the  company  will 
introduce  all Siena and Uno models in CNG avatars some  time  in 
May-June,  according to the company's Managing Director,  Mr.  G. 
Ravina.

Eicher  Motors  Ltd.  (EML) announced its entry  into  the  heavy 
commercial  vehicle  (HCV) segment with the unveiling  of  Eicher 
20.16  -  a 16 tonne vehicle designed and developed  entirely  in 
India. Mr. Subodh Bhargava, Chairman, Eicher Group, said, "Eicher 
20.16 is likely to be made available to customers from  end-2000. 
The   vehicle  will  be  competitively  priced,  based   on   the 
performance  and  features  which it offers  as  related  to  the 
competition.''

Ashok Leyland launched its luxury vehicle `Exuba' to br priced up 
to Rs. 30 lakhs to cater to the corporate and the tourism sector. 
"The Exuba is based on the existing 1,512 Cargo vehicle  platform 
which  is  designed  to cater to  various  customer  needs,"  the 
executive director (marketing division), Mr. Amol J. Sandil, told 
newspersons.  He  said  the company  would  manufacture  the  new 
vehicle  at  its  Hosur factory and hoped to  produce  about  500 
vehicles annually.

The  auto major Tata Engineering and Locomotive  Company  (Telco) 
has  shifted  into  overdrive  mode  and  is  ready  to  take  on 
competition in the MUV segment with an all-new Sumo which will be 
launched next month. The roll out of the new model will  coincide 
with  the  frenzied  action that the MUV  segment  is  likely  to 
witness  over  the  next few months, with the  recent  launch  of 
Toyota-Kirloskar's much awaited Qualis model.

Top  company sources told that the new Sumo will  sport  improved 
fuel  efficiency,  a  better  braking  system  and  a  brand  new 
suspension. While M & M did eat into Sumo's market share over the 
last  year,  it is the prospective launch of  Toyota's  MUV  that 
catalysed the decision to go in for a major overhaul of the Sumo.

Eicher  Tractors has tied up with Ricardo of the U.K., Valtra  of 
Finland  and  Steyre of Austria  to  manufacture  technologically 
advanced tractors in the 30-60 hp range. The company is  planning 
to launch a 35 hp tractor in March, a 60 hp tractor in April-June 
and  a 50 hp tractor soon after in technical  collaboration  with 
Valtra and Steyre, the Eicher MD, Mr. R. C. Jain, said.

Honda Motor Co. said it planned to launch four-stroke scooters in 
India in the second half of 2001 and increase production of  two-
stroke scooters at its plant outside New Delhi.

LML  has drawn up an ambitious plan of launching motorcycles  and 
upgrading the existing scooters. The motorcycles are expected  to 
hit  the road in the first quarter of the current  calendar  year 
along with a wide range of 4-stroke big wheel two-wheelers.

Ford  Motor  Company at the expo dedicated  itself  to  providing 
ingenious  environmental solutions in the automotive industry  of 
the  21st Century. The company also launched its Ikon variant  of 
1.3 petrol.

Sundaram-Clayton   Ltd.,  based  in  Chennai,  has   indigenously 
developed  an electronically controlled anti-lock braking  system 
(ABS) with anti-spin regulation (ASR) for commercial vehicles  in 
India. The company displayed this unique and much needed  product 
at the expo. The system prevents skidding and improves safety  of 
the   vehicle   and  passengers  by   enhancing   stability   and 
steerability. It is an add-on to the existing pneumatic system.

Responding to the growing needs of the consumer for  alternative, 
cost   effective  fuel  systems,  the  expo   displayed   bi-fuel 
conversion  kits for enabling vehicles to run both on petrol  and 
LPG  or CNG. These kits are now in use in more than 65  countries 
world over and conform to ECE, UTAC and AGA norms and directives.

Tutu Dhawan
