
Product development


IF LIC starts with a definite advantage in the field of publicity 
and  promotion,  the  reverse  may  be  the  case  under  product 
development.

The  life insurance products can be classified into two groups  - 
packaged  and  non-packaged. LIC has been introducing  new  plans 
almost  every year. However, all these fall under  one  category, 
packaged  plans. That is, the benefits under each plan  are  pre-
defined  and the customer has to choose the plan that is  closest 
to  his requirements. Whether or not he will be able to make  the 
right choice will depend on the patience and ability of the agent 
to explain clearly all the different plans that are available. If 
the agent lacks this ability, the customer may end up with a plan 
that does not fully meet his requirements.

What  is  the  position in other countries? Just  like  LIC,  the 
companies  in other countries too sell packaged plans  with  pre-
defined  benefits. At the same time, they have  introduced  plans 
that  allow the customer to choose his requirement. For  example, 
the  two  basic plans of insurance are the  Endowment  and  Money 
Back. The customer has to first choose between the two. Based  on 
his  needs, he can then expand it by choosing  appropriate  rider 
benefits.  The choice available in respect of rider  benefits  is 
quite   wide   -   accident  cover,   critical   illness   cover, 
hospitalisation  cover  and, similar covers for  the  spouse  and 
children.

For  example, a person can choose a basic policy for say,  Rs.  5 
lakhs, and add on to accident cover for Rs. 7.50 lakhs,  critical 
illness cover for Rs. 2.50 lakhs, hospitalisation cover for Rs. 1 
lakh, life cover of Rs. 3 lakhs and hospitalisation cover of  Rs. 
1  lakh  for  his  wife.  That  is,  a  buffet  system  has  been 
introduced.  The  customer can choose the benefits he  needs  and 
assemble  his  very  own plan  of  insurance.  Besides  providing 
customer satisfaction, the other advantages of this system are:

* The agent need not remember the terms and conditions of  dozens 
of  plans.  All he has to know is the structure of half  a  dozen 
basic plans and the conditions regarding the rider benefits.

*  The  customer has a flexible choice. He can assemble  his  own 
plan  of  insurance.  If he gets married, say,  two  years  after 
taking  a  policy,  he can just add on  to  his  existing  policy 
appropriate rider benefits in respect of his wife.

*  The  major beneficiary of such a flexible system will  be  the 
office.  With the addition of rider benefits the average  premium 
per  policy  will go up and the cost ratio  will  correspondingly 
come down.

Such  flexible plans cannot be introduced without  full  computer  
support.  The  lack of it is the main reason  behind  their  non-
introduction   till  now.  Such  flexible  plans  cater  to   the 
requirements of niche market at the upper end of the spectrum and 
have  a good profit potential. The new entrants will  concentrate 
on this as yet untapped market segment and the corporation should 
carefully plan its counter strategy.

The life insurance products can also be classified in a different 
way  - participating and non-participating. (Also known  as  with 
profit  and  without  profit). Participating  policies  are  like 
equity stocks. Costlier, but eligible for a share (not less  than 
92.5  per  cent)  in  the  company's  profits.  Non-participating 
policies are like preference shares. Cheaper, but not eligible to 
participate in the profits of the company. 

The  premium  rates  under  non-participating  policies  will  be 
substantially lower than those under the participating ones.  For 
example, the premium rate, in the case of a person aged 30, under 
the  20 year with profit endowment assurance plan of LIC  is  Rs. 
51.50  The  rate under the corresponding without profit  plan  is 
only Rs. 33.20.

Till  a  few  years  ago,  the  agents  of  LIC  had  only   been 
concentrating  on  marketing participating policies.  The  rising 
trend in the bonus curve and the absence of competition were  the 
factors  behind  this approach. During the  Nineties,  LIC  began 
taking conscious steps to correct this lopsided approach, but  is 
still a long way off from achieving a proper mix.

What  will  be the approach of the new entrants. It would  be  at 
least ten years before their bonus rates can come any where  near 
that of LIC. They cannot afford to cut the margins and reduce the 
premium rates since it would then take a longer time before  they 
can match LIC's bonus rates. 

To avoid unfavourable comparison, they may prefer to  concentrate 
on  non-participating policies. No bonus need be  declared  under 
these policies and comparison with LIC will only be on the  basis 
of operational efficiency and premium rates. 

Since the entire profit under this class of business will  accrue 
to the shareholders, the new entrants can afford to reduce  their 
margins  and correspondingly the premium rates. Lower cost  ratio 
resulting  from  operational  efficiency  and  better  investment 
performance  may  also enable them to reduce  the  premium  rates 
further.

So,  the strategy of new entrants will be to concentrate  on  the 
designing  of  flexible, non-participating plans  and  shift  the 
market  focus from bonus rates to premium rates  and  operational 
efficiency.  LIC has to plan well to counter this thrust. It  has 
one major advantage. 

Its  shareholder,  the Government, takes only 5 per cent  of  the 
profits  emerging  under the without profit (that  is,  the  non- 
participating) portfolio whereas the shareholders of new entrants 
will take the full 100 per cent. 

This  will give a definite edge to LIC in any rate war,  provided 
it plays its cards well.

Will  the  new  entrants concentrate  only  on  non-participating 
policies and avoid confronting LIC under participating  policies. 
Though  there  is nothing in the Insurance Act  to  prevent  life 
insurance   companies  from  marketing   only   non-participating 
policies, there are some practical difficulties in adopting  such 
a strategy. These will be dealt with in the next issue.

R. Ramakrishnan
