
Personal advertising for job search


PERSONAL  advertising  is  a  job  search  strategy  used  by  an 
applicant  for  logically  but  impressively  presenting  his/her 
skills, interests, personal attributes and results to an employer 
in  the  form  a  written document. It is  a  means  of  enticing 
employers to meet with the job applicant who could be  considered 
for  employment. Though application blank serves as a  source  of 
information   about  job  applicants  as  to  their   background, 
education, work experience, previous salary, and so forth, a more 
effective and innovative means of advertising a job applicant  is 
through  a  `resume'  which  is now  becoming  an  essential  and 
expected  part  of  virtually  any  job  search.  Nowadays,  many 
multinational  corporations  and Indian business  and  industrial 
organisations  use resume as a formalised source  of  information 
about  applicants and ask the prospective recruits to  submit  it 
along with a cover letter.

``A  resume  is  the first, and sometimes  the  only,  glimpse  a 
prospective  employer,  has  of a job applicant.  It  presents  a 
professional organised, competent image of a recruit"  (Milkovich 
and  Boudreau). As a matter of fact, resume writing is  a  highly 
individualised  task  and it requires a lot  of  preparation.  `A 
resume  forms  the  first,  and  if  poorly  written,  the   last 
impression  on an employer'. Woefully enough, many young men  and 
women graduates who are afresh from colleges and universities are 
neither  familiar  with or given any career  guidance  in  resume 
writing,  including cover letter structuring. As a  result,  they 
virtually  fumble at preparing a resume when asked to format  one 
and  eventually make a dog's breakfast of writing a resume and  a 
cover letter.

It  is  noticed that many cover letters and  resumes  in  English 
prepared   by   young  aspirants  contain   poor   grammar,   bad 
punctuation,  poor sentence structure, misspelled words and  what 
not!  These  cover  letters  and resumes  submitted  by  the  job 
applicants are neither fish, fresh nor good red herring which the 
employers are unable to understand either head or tail of what do 
the applicants want and why! 

It  is  obvious  that, one cannot write a  strong  resume,  until 
she/he  knows what is wanted. Tom Jackson, author of The  Perfect 
Resume, quotes an employment manager of a corporation in the U.S. 
``The  problem  with most resumes is not much the form  of  them, 
although that's bad enough, it's deeper that that. It's that  the 
people  who write them aren't really in touch with who  they  are 
what they have to offer. Their magnificence, if you will. Ant  it 
shows.  Tell them not to rush into the resume right way.  To  sit 
back and take inventory first".

Many  job applicants are not clearly and precisely aware  of  the 
layout  of resumes or the outline for cover letters. In point  of 
fact,  the  preparation  of a resume consists  of  four  building  
blocks,  namely,  (1)  What are your skills? (2)  What  are  your 
interests?  (3) What are your personal attributes? and  (4)  What 
are  your results? First of all, every job applicant  who  begins 
writing  a  resume  must do a self-assessment by  way  of  asking 
questions  like Do I enjoy/Am I good at specific skills  relevant 
to  the  job which I intend to apply? What do I like to  do  (for 
example,   I  like  to  work  with  machines,  to   take   risks, 
organisational  problem solving, and interviewing people)?  Am  I 
having  the personal attributes, which are required of me by  the 
recruiters  (for  example, I am honest,  hardworking,  assertive, 
careful,   thorough,   responsible,   intellectual,   persistent, 
insightful, diligent, and imaginative)? What is my achievement or 
accomplishment  in  a particular activity or job,  which  can  be 
measurable?

For  writing an effective resume, the job applicant  must  choose 
words carefully. ``Active, decisive verbs give the impression  of 
a  productive,  `get  the job done' kind of  person".  There  are 
hundreds  of `virtual verbs' which the applicant should use  (for 
example, achieved, contributed, administered, analysed, designed, 
directed, coordinated, developed, supervised, trained, published, 
executed, initiated, studied, and handled).

Most  resumes include the following information (Source:  Student 
Job  SearchIthaca, New York; Comell University. Office of  Career 
Services, NYSSILR, 1986).

Identification  -  name,  address, phone number;  career  or  job 
objective   (to   obtain  a  position  as   a...);   a   personal 
qualifications;  education;  course  concentrations;   employment 
experience;  activities; interests and/or hobbies (when  relevant 
to the job); published papers or articles and references.

There are sample resumes available which are intended to indicate 
a variety of formats which would help the job applicants get past 
`writer's block'. Interestingly enough, resumes could be  created 
on  computer Microsoft word that are tailored to the  applicant's 
preferences,  namely professional resume, elegant resume,  resume 
wizard  and contemporary resume. What is more, the applicant  can 
choose  any  of the following types namely, entry  level  resume, 
chronological  resume, functional resume and professional  resume 
for  writing a clear, concised document to reflect  his/her  best 
self. These computer techniques will facilitate a job aspirant to 
prepare a generic resume and use it tailor a specific resume  for 
each job he/she would be considering.

Yet  another  important  task is  cover  letter  structuring  for 
submitting  with  the resume. It is neither miserable  to  notice 
that  many young men and women from colleges and universities  in 
their  pursuit  for job search are not trained  nor  guidance  in 
drafting and writing a cover letter. B. Vinitsky and J.  Benjamin 
have  stated  ``A  resume  without a  cover  letter  is  like  an 
unannounced salesperson showing up at your door. If you are going 
to  let  in a perfect stranger, you at least want  to  see  their 
credentials.  This  is  exactly  what  a  cover  letter   does-it  
introduces  you,  a  total stranger, to the reader.  It  must  be 
compelling,  personable,  and  brief. It  needs  to  specifically 
relate  to  the  position  in question". A  cover  letter  is  an 
application letter, which serves as an introduction to  accompany 
a  resume.  A  well-written cover  letter  using  simple,  direct 
language  and  correct grammar is the first opportunity  the  job 
applicant has to talk to a potential employer.

As a screening device, many employers would like to read a  cover 
letter which must be clear, neat, brief, organised and above  all 
is  written with sense for as much as they will probably  have  a 
large number of cover letters together with resumes to review and 
any  awkwardly  formatted documents will obviously end  up  in  a 
dustbin!  To  quote  Richard H. Beatty from  `The  Perfect  Cover 
Letter'  ``Poor  grammar, bad punctuation, and  misspelled  words 
suggest  that the applicant is either poorly educated  or  simply 
doesn't  care  about the impression created...  The  chances  are 
unusually  high that the employer is going to forgo  reading  the 
accompanying  resume  and  quickly  move  on  to  the  next   job 
applicant".

In this highly competitive world, every job aspirant will have to 
reach the unavoidable inference that getting a job is actually  a 
lot of work. A thoughtfully written cover letter and a resume  by 
an  applicant  should not only reflect one's best self  but  will 
certainly pay off. Presently, many offices of career services  of 
colleges  and  universities  in India do not  seem  to  think  of 
offering  guidance  to the students on resume writing  and  cover 
letter structuring for they consider it as an unimportant area of 
career  counselling. It is high time that institutions of  higher 
learning gave foremost importance to this area of career guidance 
so  that many young men and women make themselves presentable  to 
the prospective employers.

J. Christopher Daniel

Reader, Madurai Institute of Social Sciences, Madurai.
