
Monitor 


HP unveils e-intelligence plan

CHENNAI: Hewlett-Packard Company has unveiled its  e-intelligence 
partner programme that unites HP's leading technology,  solutions 
services  portfolio and expertise with diverse  industry  leaders 
and  Internet  innovators. In addition, HP announced  a  customer 
relationship   management  (eCRM)  knowledge  portal   with   SAS 
Institute, which leverages SAS' expertise in end-to-end decision-
support   technologies,   and   an   e-service   developed   with 
ShortCycles, Inc. for the dynamic exchange of sales and marketing  
information, according to a company release. 

- Our Corporate Reporter.

Kale ties up with Australian firm

CHENNAI:  Kale  Consultants,  software  solutions  provider,  has 
announced  a  strategic partnership with Technology One  Ltd.,  a 
leading  software company in Australia. The latter  develops  and 
distributes  financial  management and accounting  software.  The 
partnership  will give Kale exclusive and master  distributor  of 
Technology  One. Kale will be setting up an offshore  development 
centre  for  the  Australian firm. The two  companies  will  also 
jointly  undertake large application software  development  where 
their combined resources will allow them to develop new  products 
as well as purpose built applications. 

- Our Corporate Reporter.

Stanchart, BNP launch co-branded card

MUMBAI:  Standard  Chartered Bank and Banque Nationale  De  Paris 
(BNP)  have announced the launch of a co-branded card, meant  for 
the private banking customers of BNP. As a part of the privileges 
of  the BNP private banking relationship, BNP proposes  to  offer 
this  co-branded  gold  card free of  charge  to  its  customers, 
Standard Chartered said in a statement here. The card offers  all 
the benefits of a global Standard Chartered gold credit card. BNP 
CEO  and  country manager, Mr. Jonathan Lyon, said  the  co-brand 
alliance  with  Standard  Chartered was one  more  decisive  step 
towards completing an exclusive package of products and  services 
for private banking clients. 

- PTI

Zenith launches Infotainer

MUMBAI:   Zenith  Computers  has  launched  a  PC  named   Zenith 
Infotainer  to target the first time computer buyers  looking  at 
the  purchase of a second TV with Internet facilities. Priced  at 
Rs. 49,900, t Infotainer enables users to compute, browse on  the  
Internet, have multimedia CD experience, listen to audio/video CD 
with threatre ambience at home, surf TV channels and also hook on 
to a home security system, Zenith chairman and managing director, 
Mr. Raj Saraf, said. Infotainer is powered with Intel Pentium III 
500 mhz processor. 

- PTI

HCL Insys achieves SEI Level IV

NEW DELHI: HCL Infosystems (HCL Insys) has achieved the  software 
engineering  institute (SEI) level IV on the capability  maturity 
model (CMM) scale for its professional service organisation doing 
software  development  work. The level IV was achieved  after  an 
assessment by the Quality Assurance Institute India (QAI) between 
January 17 and 22, according to a company release. 

- PTI

Website for jobs

CHENNAI: Itspace.com (www.ITspace.com) of Microland has  launched 
its Jobs channel. The site provides news, views, discussions, and 
information on the Indian IT Industry and caters to the needs  of 
more than one lakh IT professionals and over six lakh IT students 
through its new introduction. The jobs channel covers the  widest 
range of career opportunities in the IT industry from entry level 
to senior management positions. 

- Our Staff Reporter

Hyundai extends warranty

CHENNAI: Hyundai Motor India, as part of its new customer loyalty 
campaign `the Platinum Drive' is extending its two year  warranty 
on  Santro to all customers. This comes along with  the  existing 
six month spare parts warranty. The company has set the record of 
the  fastest 75,000 units in the Indian passenger  car  industry, 
achieved in less than 15 months of sales, according to a release. 
Cumulative  sales  till December 31, 1999 stood at  68,769  units 
comprising 67,080 units of Santro and 1,689 units of Accent.
