
At last, the fragrance of victory 


After  a  long  time India won a match in the  Carlton  &  United 
Series  thanks  to Sourav Ganguly's single- handed  effort.  This 
should serve as a morale-booster for the beleaguered Indian  team 
which  has  found the going tough so far. This will  surely  rank 
high  in Ganguly's list of centuries as he played a long  innings 
and almost batted the entire 50 overs while keeping the  run-rate 
ticking.

Ganguly  has  been in fine form in the series, and  only  he  and 
Tendulkar  have  shown that they have the ability  to  carry  the 
fight  to  the rival camp. Too much is expected  from  these  two 
players  and  it is time others make some  contribution.  At  the 
moment, apart from Tendulkar and Ganguly, the others merely  make 
up the numbers. 

Our `celebrated' middle-order was once again not able to make any 
substantial contribution, and continued to disappoint. This being 
such  a  vital  game, I was surprised  to  see  the  middle-order 
batsmen  still struggle for runs. Ganguly's century and  Sachin's 
41  were  the  major  factors that took India  to  a  big  total. 
Ganguly's  hundred  had  more significance as  he  got  his  runs 
knowing  about the weak middle-order and the must-win  situation. 
The brilliant start Sachin and Saurav provided was also  crucial. 
I would rate this as Ganguly's best effort since it came  against 
a sharp attack, and at a time when India needed it most.

I  think  it would be better idea if Robin Singh bats  at  No.  3 
instead  of Rahul Dravid as this would give the former some  time 
to get his eye in and then go after the bowling. Dravid is not in 
the  best of form and it is better he bats after Robin at No.  4. 
It is quite ridiculous to see Hrishikesh Kanitkar batting at  No. 
4, ahead of Robin, and looking hopelessly out of place. 

The  Indian bowlers came up with a spirited performance and  what 
really mattered was the initial dent when Shahid Afridi and Saeed 
Anwar were removed. The Indian bowlers were able to take  wickets 
at regular intervals after that and Pakistan never seemed to have 
a chance. The fact that the Indian bowlers had a fairly big total 
to  defend would have certainly given them more  confidence.  The 
important  thing  about  getting wickets regularly  is  that  the 
opposition batsmen do not have enough time to settle down. It  is 
also  difficult  to start going for the big shots as  soon  as  a 
batsman  comes into bat, especially when early wickets are  lost. 
The  Indian  bowlers  did  a commendable job  as  they  kept  the 
pressure on the Pakistani batsmen throughout. We simply  deserved 
to win this game.

I hope this victory will swing the fortunes of the Indian team as 
it  prepares for another gruelling encounter against the  Aussies 
on Wednesday.

K. SRIKKANTH
