
Ganguly sets Adelaide Oval ablaze 


By G. Viswanath

ADELAIDE,  JAN.  25. The bells at the St. Peters  Cathedral  were 
chiming merrily as if to announce India's first major victory  on 
Australian soil in two months. 

But in times when a win in sporting arena appears as a mystifying 
thing  to  the Indian cricketers even a win by one run  was  most 
welcome.  Sachin Tendulkar's team will have to keep winning  from 
here so as to make the last leg of the Carlton & United Series  a 
fascinating one. The Indians deserved to win on Tuesday night  by 
48  runs because they had put up a good total in the first  three 
and a half hours of the match at the Adelaide Oval.

The  first  two points in the tri-series may have come  a  trifle 
late  should  the events in the remaining three  matches  go  the 
other  way.  The Indians showed a lot of character, but  a  point 
which  captain Sachin Tendulkar quite did not agree with,  saying 
it was noticed only when the team was winning. Sourav Ganguly was 
of course the shining star of the day, but men like Sameer  Dighe 
and Kanitkar, too, had their moments. 

India's vice-captain Ganguly's second century in the championship 
was a phenomenal effort around which the Indian total of 267  was 
built.  The left-hander gave a certain dimension to  his  batting 
which nearly lasted the length of the innings. This is  precisely 
what  he had planned at the outset, but one which did not  happen 
because he had carried his innings to a point when there was  the 
risk  of  his becoming a victim in the slog  overs.  The  stylish 
batsman  was  so  conscious  of the hara  kiri  he  committed  at 
Melbourne after he reached his century against Australia that  he 
was very careful in not repeating the mistake, though once he was 
not seen grounding his bat while completing a third run. 

Thankfully  Tendulkar  is  not going through  another  period  of 
indecision  which  forced him to bat at No. 4 in  the  first  two 
matches of the tri-series. The strokes that flowed from the  bats 
of  Tendulkar and Ganguly held the promise of the  opening  stand 
developing  beyond the 99 runs they had made against Pakistan  at 
the Bellerive Oval. They scored more runs in the first six  balls 
of the match than in any other match. This was a fair  indication 
of the positive frame of mind they were in with Tendulkar placing 
the ball to pick three twos.

Ganguly  didn't  allow a scoring opportunity  between  point  and 
cover  go abegging. There was a great risk in his  opening  salvo 
that  went over the head of a leaping point fielder. But soon  he 
had judged the pace of the pitch which was flat enough for  Wasim 
Akram and Shoaib Akhtar to make the ball hurry through. Ganguly's 
second  shot  that raced to the cover boundary offered  the  most 
conclusive  evidence  that  he was going to enjoy  batting  on  a  
perfect pitch.

The Indian captain was even willing to play innovative strokes. A 
short  ball from Akhtar he deflected over backward point  reached 
the destination. The flying start the openers gave made sure that 
the  first  fifty  of the innings would be reached  in  under  10 
overs. The openers made it off 47 balls. But the smart move  made 
by Akram in bringing Abdur Razzaq had the desired effect.

Tendulkar   edged   an  outswinger  from   Razzaq   between   the 
wicketkeeper  and first slip, but he was not so lucky the  second 
time. He opened the face of the bat, his front foot dragged a bit 
outside  the  off stump, while trying to steer Razzaq.  The  edge 
went  straight  to Moin Khan. Razzaq has been the  only  Pakistan 
bowler  who has been able to dismiss Tendulkar in all  the  three 
matches.  But  the  positive side to the  Tendulkar  and  Ganguly 
coming  together at the start was that they have now  scored  187 
runs for the first wicket in two consecutive matches. 

Rahul  Dravid  made a glorious cover drive off  Razzaq,  but  his 
intention  was  always to play the role of an  ally.  The  second 
aggressive  shot  he made landed him in trouble, the  pull  going 
toward  Inzamam-ul-Haq in the deep. Dravid and Ganguly added  one 
short  of what the opening stand. The last four wickets  did  not 
make as much. 

The  five run an over momentum was sustained up to a  point  when 
India crossed its first hundred runs in the 20th over. The period 
of consolidation diminished it. Robin Singh swung a six over  mid 
wicket and helped Ganguly add 48 runs which was the third biggest 
stand  for  the Indians. The Pakistan captain  finally  dismissed 
Ganguly  in  the  46h over, but not before the  left  hander  had 
played a gem of a knock.

It was his second century against Pakistan and in the process  he 
crossed  5000  runs in his 131st one-day  international.  It  was 
almost  a par effort. ``It's one of the best innings I have  seen 
in a one-day match. He played his natural game and was there till 
the  46th  over. One of our top order batsmen should  do  that,'' 
said  Akram. ``I would consider the century against Sri Lanka  as 
the best I have played,'' said Ganguly.

The  Indian  fielders, Sameer Dighe and  Hrishikesh  Kanitkar  in 
particular must get the credit for keeping the Pakistan run chase 
under  check. After Jacob Martin held a catch at cover  that  saw 
the back of Saeed Anwar, Dighe brought off a superb catch,  which 
two  other Indian fielders decided to leave for the  wicketkeeper 
to  take. The top edged shot from Shahid Afridi was appearing  to 
drop at a no man's land inside the 30 yard circle, but Dighe  was 
the first fielding success of the evening when he covered  ground 
from his position and converted the catch.

Ijaz Ahmed who has been the most consistent batsman for  Pakistan 
and  the  out  of  form  Inzamam-ul-Haq  threatened  to  build  a 
partnership.  Haq  looked set for his first big innings,  but  he  
ventured into a big shot against Venkatesh Prasad.

Haq's  shot appeared to be crossing the square leg boundary  when 
Kanitkar took a one-handed catch after he had lost control of  it 
near the fence. It would have been the first six in the  Pakistan 
innings,  but  the  right handed grab by  Kanitkar  terminated  a 
potentially  dangerous looking Haq. The law permits a fielder  to 
lean  on the fence in the act of completing a catch, if there  is 
no marked boundary line. This is what Kanitkar did.

Pressure  was  always  going to tell  on  the  Pakistan  batsmen. 
Kumble's  accuracy  and  a nine-over spell by  Robin  Singh  made 
matters  difficult for the Pakistan batsmen. Ijaz Ahmed  was  one 
who  fell to the pressure trying to hit out at Kumble. It  seemed 
curtains  for Pakistan when Kumble won an appeal for  leg  before 
from umpire Darrel Hair with Moin Khan not offering a stroke.

Mahmood toys with Indian bowling

But  Azhar Mahmood playing in his third match of  the  tournament 
gave  the hammer which even made Razzaq a spectator watching  his 
partner's belligerence from the non- striker's end. The scattered 
field did not prevent Mahmood from clubbing Robin Singh,  Srinath 
and Kumble. The Indians did not wilt. Mahmood's 50 came off  only 
34  balls  which  took  Pakistan from 128 for  six  to  200  when 
Pakistan lost Razzaq to Venkatesh Prasad.

Pakistan  virtually  left  the big task on hand  to  Mahmood  who 
needed treatment for cramps. Yousuf Youhana came in as a  runner, 
but Mahmood swung Kumble straight to Kanitkar. ``He was lucky  on 
a couple of occasions. He edged Srinath twice. He was taking  too 
many  chances,'' said Tendulkar. It was fitting that  Kumble  got 
the last wicket. He had taken only three wickets in the  previous 
four matches.

His  first three wickets today took his tally to 250  in  one-day 
internationals.  In the end when Tendulkar was asked if this  was 
just  the beginning of the toughest ever week of cricket for  him 
and  the team he said, ``In international cricket every match  is 
important. We were very positive today and we will be playing the 
same way tomorrow.'' 

INDIA

S. Tendulkar c Moin b Razzaq         41
(46b, 5x4)
S. Ganguly lbw b Akram              141
(145b, 12x4, 1x6)
R. Dravid c Inzamam b Afridi         32
(58b, 1x4)
H. Kanitkar c Inzamam b Akhtar        6
(12b)
Robin Singh c & b Saqlain            21 

(23b, 1x6)
J. Martin (not out)                  10
(13b, 1x4)
J. Srinath st. Moin b Saqlain         4
(6b)
S. Dighe (not out)                    0
(2b)
Extras (lb-6, nb-5, w-1)             12
                                    --- 
Total (for six wkts. in 50 overs)   267
                                    --- 

Fall   of  wickets:  1-88  (Tendulkar),  2-175  (Dravid),   3-186 
(Kanitkar), 4-234 (Robin), 5-257 (Ganguly), 6-262 (Srinath).

Pakistan  bowling:  Akram  10-0-55-1,  Akhtar  8-0-39-1,   Razzaq 
7-0-37-1, Mahmood 9-1-42-0, Saqlain 10-0-56-2, Afridi 6-0-32-1.

PAKISTAN

S. Anwar c Martin b Mohanty           8
(14b, 1x4)
S. Afridi c Dighe b Srinath           9
(11b, 1x4)
Ijaz Ahmed c Dravid b Kumble         54
(77b, 3x4)
Inzamam-ul-Haq c Kanitkar b Prasad   15
(31b, 2x4)
Y. Youhana c Martin b Kumble         19
(26b, 1x4)
Moin Khan lbw b Kumble               15
(16b, 1x4)
A. Razzaq c Kumble b Prasad          13
(27b)
A. Mahmood c Kanitkar b Kumble       67
(50b, 7x4, 1x6)
W. Akram c Srinath b Mohanty          4
(5b)
Saqlain Mushtaq c Tendulkar b Srinath 1
(7b)
S. Akhtar (not out)                   1
(13b)
Extras (lb-4, nb-7, w-2)             13
                                    --- 
Total (in 44.4 overs)               219
                                    --- 

Fall of wickets: 1-20 (Anwar), 2-21 (Afridi), 3-62 (Inzamam),  4-
109 (Youhana), 5-124 (Ijaz), 6-128 (Moin), 7-200 (Razzaq),  8-207 
(Akram), 9-210 (Saqlain).

India  bowling:  Srinath  8-0-47-2,  Mohanty  10-0-42-2,   Prasad 
8-0-41-2, Robin 9-0-45-0, Kumble 9.4-0-40-4.







