
Kobi Ziv crashes out 


By S.R. Suryanarayan

CHENNAI, JAN. 25. For the top seeded Slovakian Ladislav Svarc and 
the unseeded but Bangalore-leg winner Kobi Ziv, the tour to India 
was with a special mission. The two experienced mixed luck as day 
two  ran out in the TNTA'75-Futures men's tennis championship  at 
the Nungambakkam stadium on Tuesday.

Svarc,  who  had  become  a somebody after  his  victory  in  the 
Hyderabad-leg  is  nursing hopes of getting  into  his  country's 
Davis  Cup team and certainly he did his cause no damage  with  a 
fluent  show over the German Arne Kreitz. ``The performance  here 
matters,'' he stated after a superb outing in what he thought was 
``good  weather  compared to minus five  degree  conditions  back 
home.''  But for Ziv, the Israeli who has set a goal of  breaking 
into  the top 200 at the earliest, it proved a setback.  Ziv  was 
wore  down  by his compatriot Nir Welgreen, who  incidentally  is 
seeded fifth. 

Considering  the fact that Ziv was unseeded the result was not  a 
sensation,  but  looking  into the recent show  it  did  cause  a 
ripple.  Welgreen  had  not  crossed  past  the  first  round  in 
Bangalore,  losing to Mustafa Ghouse, who himself had a  terrible 
outing  today.  It was a well contested match  where  Ziv  looked 
dashing  in  the way he regained composure  by  restoring  parity 
while bagging the second set without conceding a game. Thereafter 
Ziv lost way. 

Long rallies and predominantly baseline play featured the contest 
but  in the end not only did Ziv lose the match, but  lost  grace 
too,  shouting  at the Chair Umpire on his way  out,  crashing  a 
plastic  bottle onto the side fencing before slamming a  fist  on 
the  glass door at the entrance of the main building.  No  damage 
was  done  but  the show of anger  seemed  totally  unwanted  and 
surprisingly  the whole thing was overlooked when  for  `repeated 
questioning of the Chair Umpire' another player, Vishal Uppal  of 
India was given a code violation (read warning). 

Be that as it may, it was a poor day for the Indians despite  the 
fact  that  two  of them, lucky losers in  the  qualifying  round 
received  the  opportunity  of  playing  in  the  main  draw   as 
`replacements'. Vijendra Laad came for Tom Spinks of Britain (who 
did  not report his unavailability to the  Tournament  Supervisor 
and  hence faces a penalty of $ 250) and Anand Radhakrishnan  for 
Jicham  Zaatini  (Lib),  who quit with a  shoulder  problem.  Yet 
another replacement was Sebastian Dacosta for Viktor Bruthans  of 
Slovakia  (Bangalore  leg runner-up), who reported  sick  with  a 
stomach  problem.  Apart from Laad and Radhakrishnan,  the  other 
Indians  to  go out were Vishal Uppal, Manoj  Mahadevan,  Mustafa 
Ghouse  and  Rishi Sridhar beasides the doubles  pair  of  Kamala 
Kannan and Ravishankar.  

The results: Singles: Andy Ram (ISR) bt Vijayendra Laad (Ind)  6-
0,  6-4; Miles Maclagan (Gbr) bt Manoj Mahadevan (Ind) 6-1,  6-3; 
Tom  Higgins  (Gbr)  bt Mustafa Ghouse (Ind)  6-4,  6-  1;  Boris 
Borgula  (SVK)  bt G. Ganesh (Ind) 6-2,  6-1;  Donovan  September 
(RSA)  bt Sebastian Dacosta (INA) 6-2, 6-3; Ladislav Svarc  (SVK) 
bt Arne Kreitz (Ger) 6-3, 6-4; Tomas Janci (SVK) bt Vishal  Uppal 
(Ind)  6-7 (6), 6-3, 6-2; Denis Golovanov (Rus) bt Rishi  Sridhar 
(Ind) 6-3, 7-6 (5); Suwandi Suwandi (INA) bt Anand  Radhakrishnan 
(Ind) 6-3, 6-2; Febi Widhiyanto (INA) bt Hendri Pramono (INA)  6-
1, 6-4; Nir Welgreen (ISR) bt Kobi Ziv (ISR) 6- 3, 0-6, 6-1.

Doubles:  Suwandi  Suwandi and Febi Widhiyanto  (INA)  bt  Kamala 
Kannan and P. Ravishankar (Ind) 6-3, 6-2.
