
Bad day for the top seeds 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 25. Punna Vishal knocked  out  top-seed  Akshay 
Vishal  Rao 6-2, 6-4 in the pre-quarterfinals of the  ITF  junior 
tournament at the DLTA Complex here on Tuesday.

Vishal,  16, had beaten the National junior champion in  straight 
sets  the  last time they met in an  invitational  tournament  at 
Dublin in England. With Akshay going for his shots and erring  in 
the process, Vishal had the better of the exchanges including the 
breaks this day.

Vishal ran away with the first set with breaks in the fourth  and 
eighth  games.  Akshay started the second set on a  better  note, 
breaking  Vishal in the first game, to take a 2-0 lead.  However, 
after the two broke each other three times, Vishal held serve  in 
the 10th game to emerge triumphant in an hour and 25 minutes.

``After  a  tough  match yesterday, I was playing  a  lot  better 
today.  Akshay was trying to hit hard and was making  mistakes'', 
said Vishal, who will meet Vinod Sewa in the quarterfinals.

Vinod showed the door to fifth-seed Karan Doctor losing just four 
games,  and  will have the edge over Vishal,  having  beaten  him 
twice in their previous meetings.

In  a  repeat of the final of the 64-draw  Colombo  event,  Sunil 
Kumar subdued the hard-hitting Amanjot Singh for the loss of five 
games,  though he tended to be erratic in going for his  strokes, 
at  times with raw power. The 16-year-old left-hander  will  meet 
qualifier  Raian Luchici of Romania, who beat Nishank Mishra  for 
the loss of four games.

Prantap  Chaturvedi continued with his fine run and  sailed  past 
Adam  Jaya of Malaysia, and will meet Chandrasekar  Mohanty,  who 
was equally impressive in his 6-3, 6-0 victory over sixth-seed P. 
Ravikrishna.

Qualifier Uros Kuhar of Slovenia also continued with his good run 
and  beat seventh-seed Alok Bhide in straight sets. In fact,  the 
only seed left in the draw apart from the eighth seed Sunil Kumar 
was second-seed Omar Behroozian of the United Arab Emirates.

In the girls section, the champion of the Colombo event,  Nandita 
Chandrasekar  was beaten in straight sets by her Tamil Nadu  mate 
Samrita Sekar.

Samrita,  15, a trainee with Ramesh Krishnan, had beaten  Nandita 
in  the  under-18  section in Trivandrum recently,  and  hit  her 
double-fisted strokes at sharp angles to repeat her feat.  Though 
she was playing in her first ITF tournament, Samrita played  with  
a cool head to script a 7-5, 6-4 triumph.

Nandita  looked to be tired after her efforts in Colombo,  and  a 
long  match  here  in the first round, and thus  was  not  moving 
briskly  on the fast courts. She was not able to keep  pace  with 
her smooth-stroking opponent, despite being on par at 5-5 in  the 
first set and 4-4 in the second.

Second-seed  Liza Pereira and seventh-seed Sania Mirza  were  the 
other  Indians  to confirm their quarterfinal entry, and  did  so 
with  ease, dropping six games in all between them, beating  Rati 
Kumar and Vishika Chhetri respectively.

Geeta  Manohar  was leading 6-4, 5-6 against  Thassa  Virayaviroj 
when rain intervened. The unseeded Geeta kept her composure  when 
play  resumed  after two hours, and broke the Thai to  force  the 
tie-breaker  in which she played flawlessly to win 6- 4, 7-6  (7-
2).

Earlier  in the morning, the three Thai girls played their  first 
round with mixed fortunes. While fourth-seed Rattiya Hiranrat and 
eighth-seed   Thassa  Virayaviroj  won  comfortably,   fifth-seed 
Montinee  Tungphong  was shown the door by  Ankita  Bhambri.  The 
Indian, however, could not get past Yan Ze Xie of China.

The results (all Indians unless mentioned otherwise):

Boys (pre-quarterfinals): P. Vishal bt Akshay Vishal Rao 6-2,  6-
4;  Vinod  Sewa bt Karan Doctor 6-2, 6-2; Prantap  Chaturvedi  bt 
Adam Jaya (Mal) 6-1, 6-1; Chandrasekar Mohanty bt P.  Ravikrishna 
6-3,  6-0; Sunil Kumar bt Amanjot Singh 6-3, 6-2;  Raian  Luchici 
(Rom) bt Nishank Mishra 6-2, 6-2; Uros Kuhar (Slo) bt Alok  Bhide 
6-2, 6-1; Omar Behroozian (UAE) bt Vivek Jhaveri 6- 4, 6-3.

Girls  (pre-quarterfinals):  Shuai Peng (Chn) bt  Pei  Yuin  Keng 
(Mal)  4-6,  6-3, 6-3; Sania Mirza bt Vishika Chhetri  6-2,  6-2; 
Samrita  Sekar  bt Nandita Chandrasekar 7-5, 6-4;  Anna  Shchupak 
(Uzb) bt Chen Yee Liaw (Mal) 6-1, 6-3; Yan Ze Xie (Chn) bt Ankita 
Bhambri 6-4, 6-0; Rattiya Hiranrat (Tha) bt Isha Chopra 6-0, 6-2; 
Geeta  Manohar bt Thassa Virayaviroj (Tha) 6-4, 7-6  (7-2);  Liza 
Pereira bt Rati Kumar 6-1, 6-1.

First round: Ankita Bhambri bt Montinee Tungphong (Tha) 6-2, 6-3; 
Rattiya  Hiranrat  (Tha)  bt Nandini  Perumal  6-0,  6-2;  Thassa 
Virayaviroj (Tha) bt Anete Rozkalne (Lat) 6-0, 6-4.
