
Agassi and Sampras keep semifinal appointment 


By Nirmal Shekar

MELBOURNE,  JAN. 25. As Mr. Inspiration and Miss Inspired  led  a 
Yankee  procession into the semifinals of the year's first  Grand 
Slam championship on Australia Day eve here, today,  expectations 
that  the  on-court fireworks over the next few days  will  match 
anything  that  can  be seen in the skies above  the  beaches  of 
Sydney or Melbourne on Wednesday may not really be misplaced.

A little over two years ago, if you had ventured to predict  that 
Andre Agassi and Jennifer Capriati would be where they are today, 
in  the  semifinals of the first major championship  of  the  new 
millennium, the ones that heard you might have believed that  you 
needed to have your head examined.

But, then, the unpredictable and the unexpected are the very soul 
of  sport  and  there has been nothing more  soul-  lifting  this 
fortnight than Capriati's unlikely surge to the semifinals of the 
Australian  Open - nine long and difficult years after  her  last 
Grand  Slam semifinal appearance, at age 15, at the U.S. Open  in 
1991.

Capriati,  who handily beat Ai Sugiyama of Japan 6-0, 6-2 at  the 
Rod Laver Arena, says that she was hugely inspired by what Agassi 
has  accomplished in the most difficult and unlikely of his  many 
comebacks last year when he won two of three Grand Slam finals in 
which he figured to end 1999 as the world champion.

And  Agassi,  very  much this  tournament's  irresistible  force, 
belted  his way past a gifted Moroccan - Hicham Arazi -  who  was 
trying  to  match a Concorde with his own, cute  little  made-to- 
order flying machine. They flew in different altitudes, in vastly 
different flight paths.

And, quite predictably, they reached different destinations,  too 
-  Agassi  ended up in his fourth straight Grand  Slam  semifinal 
while Arazi, beaten 6-4, 6-4, 6-2, made his way to the  Players's 
Bank  at Melbourne Park to pick up his cheque before checking  on 
the flights out of Melbourne. In the semifinals, Agassi will take 
on  archrival  Pete  Sampras  in the  semifinals.  Driving  at  a 
comfortable  40  kph, Sampras cruised past his  countryman  Chris 
Woodruff 7-5, 6-3, 6-3 later in the night. 

If  Capriati said that Agassi has provided her inspiration it  is 
understandable.  What the gifted 29-year-old from Las  Vegas  has 
accomplished over the last two years is at once mind-boggling and 
wonderfully inspiring.

After  playing  in Challenger events to move up  in  the  ranking 
towards  the  end of 1997, Agassi climbed from 122 to  No.  6  in 
1998, the biggest one-year jump into the Top 10 in the history of  
ATP  rankings, before setting out on his all-conquering run  last 
year.

``He  has  been  an  inspiration. What  he  has  accomplished  is 
phenomenal,'' said Capriati, the Princess among the teen  phenoms 
10 years ago. ``It happened at the same time. We were both trying 
to make a comeback. He just got there before I did. He beat me.''

But,  then, unlike Agassi, Capriati has age on her side.  She  is 
only  23, and given her improved level of fitness and hunger  for 
success,  who is to say how far she will go. One thing  is  sure: 
she has matched her best ever Grand Slam showing and has  nothing 
to lose in her next match.

Cruise mode

Against  an over-matched opponent, today, Capriati was very  much 
on   top  from  the  very  beginning,  hitting   powerful,   deep 
groundstrokes  and  never allowing Sugiyama to settle  down.  The 
only  real  scare came, not from her opponent, but from  her  own 
strained  abdomen which seemed to trouble the 1992  Olympic  gold 
medallist after she opened up a 3-0 lead in the first set.

``I  just strained it a little bit. I have a day off tomorrow  so 
it  should  be okay,'' said Capriati, who took medical  time  out 
after the third game.

Coming back from the break, Capriati, who last played in a  Grand 
Slam  quarterfinal  eight  years ago  at  Wimbledon,  reeled  off 
another  seven  games in a row for a 4-0 second set  lead.  As  a 
double bagel stared her in the face, the Japanese player  managed 
to  break  the  American's serve in the fifth  game  and  allowed 
herself a broad grin.

But  that  face-saving  effort only  delayed  the  inevitable  as 
Capriati  went  on to wrap up the match in quick time.  She  will 
take  on her second-seeded compatriot, Lindsay Davenport  in  the 
semifinals.  Davenport outplayed Julie Halard- Decugis of  France 
6-1, 6-2 later in the evening.

``The last time I played in a (Grand Slam) semifinal was  against 
Monica (Seles) at the (U.S.) Open. Was it 1991? I was like 15  or 
something then. It was just all exciting. It's not the same  now. 
I've  really  had  to  work hard to get  to  this  point,''  said 
Capriati.

So,  indeed has Agassi. About the time that Capriati  became  the 
youngest  Grand  Slam semifinalist in the history of the  game  - 
aged 14 years and two months - at the French Open in 1990, Agassi 
himself was 19 and expected to become the Lord and monarch of the 
game.

The man from Las Vegas was stunned by a 30-year-old from  Ecuador 
called  Andres Gomez, the same year and in the final of the  very 
tournament  -  French Open - where Capriati made  history.  Since  
then, it has been a roller-coaster ride for the gifted  American, 
his  career  going through more ups and downs than there  may  be 
craters on the surface of the moon.

But, finally, just when everybody might have thought that he  was 
too  old  for a meaningful comeback, the bald man from  the  neon 
capital  of  the world has set out on a dream run which,  on  the 
basis of the form he has shown here this fortnight, may very well 
stretch beyond the climactic weekend of this championship.

Today, Hicham Arazi, one of two Moroccans - Younes el Ayanaoui is 
the other - in the quarterfinals here, never really threatened to 
spoil  Agassi's  party, although he did make  his  presence  felt 
briefly when he broke Agassi's serve early in the second game.

Another day in office

Otherwise,  it  was  a routine day at the office  for  the  world 
champion who broke Arazi's serves five times in the match,  twice 
apiece in the second and third sets.

Playing from just inside the baseline and taking the ball  early, 
Agassi  never gave the Moroccan the chance to make an  impression 
on his game. 

It  became so frustrating for the genial Arazi that at one  point 
in the match - with Agassi serving for the second set in the 10th 
game - the Moroccan, after a futile chase to reach the ball  from 
one  end of the baseline to another, sat down on a  hoarding  and 
waved in a gesture of helplessness.

``I've been around way too long to take any match for  granted,'' 
said Agassi. ``I never played him before and didn't know what  to 
expect.''

Surely,  he cannot say that of his next opponent, a certain  Pete 
Sampras.  It's the rivalry of the 1990s, qualitatively,  although 
it never materialised often enough for the fans to revel in. Now, 
with one man approaching age 30 and the other close to 29, Agassi 
and Sampras seem to be running into each other more often than in 
their younger days.

``When  you  respect an opponent, with the  respect  there  comes 
anticipation  and  extra  energy,'' said Agassi  who  was  beaten 
comprehensively by Sampras in the finals at Wimbledon and the ATP 
Tour World championship at Hannover last year.

But going by the form that they have displayed here, Agassi  will 
surely  be stepping in on the court for their latest duel with  a 
lot  of confidence. His form has been a lot more consistent  than 
his  great rival's. But, then, nothing fires up Pete  Sampras  as 
much as the sight of Andre Agassi across the net.

Sonal Phadke progresses

Meanwhile, there was a whiff of success for India today as  Sonal 
Phadke  advanced  to the second round of the  girls  championship 
with  a  6-2,  6-2  defeat of  Linda  Fallon  of  Australia.  The 
Australian  wild card presented no problems at all to the  Indian 
who won as she pleased.

The results (prefix denotes seedings):

Men's  singles (quarterfinals): 1- Andre Agassi (U.S.) bt  Hicham 
Arazi  (Mor)  6-4,  6-4,  6-2; 3-Pete  Sampras  (U.S.)  bt  Chris 
Woodruff (U.S.) 7-5, 6-3, 6-3. 

Women's singles (quarterfinals): 2-Lindsay Davenport (U.S.) bt 9-
Julie Halard-Decugis (Fra) 6-1, 6- 2; Jennifer Capriati (U.S.) bt 
Ai Sugiyama (Jpn) 6-0, 6-2.
