
Abundant guidelines in ancient texts


CHENNAI, JAN. 26. The fact that the corresponding Sanskrit  words 
for  corruption,  dishonesty, divorce and the like  do  not  find 
mention  in  our  ancient  scriptural  literature  indicates  the 
impeccable  qualities of man in society. Each one did his or  her 
duty. The Ramayana refers to the glorious nature of the lives led 
by men in the days of the divine drama. The Mahabharata  contains 
bundles  of morals and injunctions which when upheld,  will  help 
men  and women to build their character. ``All guidelines can  be 
found  in  it.  What is not there in this epic  cannot  be  found 
anywhere  else.''  The Bhagavad Gita, the Lord's  sermon  on  the 
battlefield,  is enshrined in it. The Lord, who recited  it,  has 
cleared all the doubts that a person may harbour in his heart and 
also clarified various types of questions. The Gita lays down the 
norms of efficient administration. 

Within the Gita is an oft-quoted verse which apparently seems  to 
be  somewhat  puzzling.  But  its  contents  have  been  properly 
annotated  by  scholars. The Lord Himself  says:  ``Refrain  from 
enjoying  the  fruits of your actions. You have  every  right  to 
perform  the  duty  incumbent  on  you  by  the   socio-religious 
injunctions  of  the scriptures but you have no  right  over  the 
fruits thereof.'' This statement is of great relevance to  modern 
management pinpointing the employer-employee relationship. 

Sri  Sathyathma  Thirtha Swami of Utharadhi Math, in  a  lecture, 
pointed  out  that  this  dictum  of  the  Lord  may  raise  some 
apprehension  among some. Will anyone do a job without  expecting 
any  remuneration  or reward? It is obvious that all of  us  work 
towards achieving gain. The statement may also be taken to favour 
the  employer. Far from it, what the Lord said was that any  type 
of duty should not be totally motivated by only some expectation. 
The  servant should carry out his obligations with diligence  and 
honesty. The reward will surely be forthcoming. The employer,  on 
his  part,  should surely pay the sum due to the  work  done  not 
reluctantly  but out of affection and willingly. There should  be 
mutual love and consideration. 

There  are abundant guidelines in our ancient texts  about  human 
conduct. The Gita and the Vishnu Sahasranama contain words  which 
when  interpreted  give further clue as to how  to  preserve  our 
hoary  tradition.  Three attributes among the 1000 refer  to  the 
pleasure the Lord derives on being praised for His  benefactions. 
God  praises those who adore Him. Those who control the  servants 
should give up anger and be polite and this aspect of  management 
is  incorporated  in  these names. It is  our  responsibility  to 
uphold our traditions. 
