
Satyam Infoway looks at organisational recast


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN.  4.  Satyam  Infoway  Ltd.  is  contemplating   to 
commission the services of the well-known global consultancy firm 
-  McKinsey  - to undertake a thorough review  of  the  company's 
growth  strategy and suggest a suitable organisational  structure 
accordingly.

The  need for external help to take a dispassionate look  at  the 
working  of Satyam Infoway has become quite imperative  now  that 
the company has become highly visible following the conclusion of 
the biggest acquisition yet by an information technology  company 
in   India  when  it  took  over  a  little-known   India   World 
Communications Private Ltd. in a cash all deal at the fag end  of 
last  year.  Since then, Satyam Infoway has been  in  the  public 
glare with a series of joint ventures with well-known names  such 
as Bank of Madura, ICICI and the RPG Group.

Sources  concede  that  managing  the growth is  bound  to  be  a 
daunting  task.  The  consultant  will  primarily  be  asked   to 
recommend  an organisational structure even while suggesting  the 
right  growth  strategy for the country's  first  private  sector 
Internet  service  provider. Typically, it will  examine  whether 
Satyam  Infoway  should  follow  an organic  path  or  pursue  an 
aggressive take-over route to grow. Once this issue is addressed, 
the  consultant is expected to prescribe the right structure  for 
the organisation.

McKinsey,  it is learnt, will examine the issues in entirety  and 
look  at  various options. Should the company have  a  real  time 
structure?  Or  should  it have a fixed one?  At  what  frequency 
should a review of the structure take place? All these  questions 
are be addressed by the consultant. 

Sources,  nevertheless, have made it clear that Satyam  Infoway's 
focus  will  continue  to be on five  stated  areas  -  corporate 
connectivity (including B2B), Internet, portals (including  B2C), 
web  services  and Cyber caffe. The consultant's  suggestions  or 
recommendations will conform with the broad business areas of the 
company.

Satyam Infoway, in the meantime, is set to have a Chief Operating 
Officer  (COO). Once a COO is inducted, Mr. R. Ramaraj,  Managing 
Director,  is likely to relieve himself of the daily  operational 
aspects of the company and exclusively focus on strategy planning 
and  clearing policy cobwebs relating to the businesses in  which 
Satyam Infoway operates. 

Launches services portal

Satyam Infoway has greeted the millennium with the launch of  its  
virtual  market place - www.serwiz.com. The website is  bound  to 
open  up  global markets for Indians in the service  industry  by 
offering  an instant connection between the service provider  and 
the consumer of services.

What is serwiz.com? It creates a virtual community for  services. 
It  brings together providers and users of services on  a  global 
scale.  This  is  a portal with complete,  end-to  -end  business 
process  integration  - certification,  marketing,  registration, 
transaction and settlements. 

Some  of  the  services  that the portal  can  offer  are  remote 
customer   interaction,   back  office   operations,   multimedia 
services, legal services and insurance claims processing.

At  a press conference here today, Mr. Ramalinga Raju,  chairman, 
Satyam  Computer  Services, said the potential was  unlimited.  A 
host  of small and medium sized businesses and  professionals  in 
India  could now effectively offer their services to  the  global 
market through Satyam's initiative. 

While  they bring in their skills, the company would assist  them 
with the soft and hard infrastructure and marketing support which 
gives  the service provider valuable time to devote  to  quality, 
speed of delivery and price of their services.

Mr.  Ramaraj  indicated that the demand for IT  enabled  services 
could be substantial in the next ten years. The company's  vision 
was to bring dependable , quality service at lower cost, he said. 
