
Opening the flood-gates


IT  is reported that the Government is all set to permit for  the 
first time the big foreign retail chains to open up their outlets 
in  India.  Their proposals for foreign direct  investment  (FDI) 
have reportedly received the support of the Ministry of  External 
Affairs  and  the Prime Minister Office. As it is,  for  sometime 
now,  FDI in bulk trade in India has been allowed. Its  extension 
to retail trade is believed to hold the prospects of becoming the 
main arena for attracting FDI. This decision is reported to  have 
faced some opposition within the Government, particularly by  the 
Commerce Ministry. But evidently the more powerful ministries and 
ministers have thrown their weight behind the proposal to  permit 
FDI  in retail trade in the form of chain stores, operating on  a 
grand  scale. It may be noted that throwing open retail trade  to 
foreign  capital  is not a part of any  international  obligation 
flowing  from any multilateral agreement such as  WTO  concerning 
trade-related investment measures.

Is  it  a  suo  moto public decision or is  a  response  to  some 
specific proposals awaiting clearance or is it that some agencies 
not  directly  connected with trade are  exerting  pressure?  The 
hypothesis  of  some  pressure  being brought  to  bear  on  this 
decision  makes  some  prima facie sense.  This  is  because  the 
External  Affairs Ministry is unlikely to take a position,  leave 
alone  a strong, decisive position, on a strictly economic  issue 
which  does not form a part of the MEA's own direct  jurisdiction 
unless  some  interests  connected  with  foreign  countries  are 
involved.  This  is not a minor matter in the sense  that  it  is 
visualised  that opening up of retail trade would  attract  large 
amounts  of FDI, taking the country close to the  realisation  of 
the target of luring in $10 billion annually. Here is yet another 
instance  of policies rooted in extraneous considerations to  the 
exclusion  of the sector/activity specific factors, like that  of 
retail  trade  in this case. But the short-term gain  by  way  of 
inflow  of  foreign exchange is really illusory.  After  one-time 
initial  investment, bulk of working funds of  foreign  retailers 
would be provided by Indian banks or as suppliers' credit.  Their 
annual  turnover  would be a multiple of  working  funds,  making 
their  repatriable returns very large. Thus for an initial  forex 
gain, one would contract long-term obligation of large outflow of 
foreign  exchange. Some other gains expected of FDI in  retailing 
are:  Modernisation of retailing, prospects of reaping  economies 
of  scale  and scope and give the Indian shoppers  the  taste  of 
newer  things  such as convenience shopping, shopping  under  one 
roof  and the benefit of proper quality control and grading.  The 
sheer fact of their knowledge of and access to bulk suppliers  of 
quality  goods, it is maintained, should enable the  consumer  to 
get better worth of his rupee.

Contrasted  to the above, in India, most retailing is  undertaken 
by  small, own-account sole proprietary or partnership  concerns. 
Lately  more  organised  larger units too are  appearing  in  the  
cities. Many Indian retailers are too small to be registered even 
under the Shops and Establishments Act and not infrequently  they 
belong to the unorganised and/or informal sector. The term kirana 
shop mentality used by the management gurus is indicative of  the 
archaic,  primordial  forms  of organisation  and  management  of 
retailing. In this context, it is implied, that the entry of  FDI 
would introduce a whiff of fresh air, modernity and provision  of 
greater  value  service to the consumer, including  assurance  of 
quality, after-sales service, financial gain on account of  scale 
economies  and pleasant ambience. With the liberalisation of  the 
import  of consumer goods, it is clear that the  foreign  trading 
concerns  would enjoy an obvious upper hand  vis-a-vis  numerous, 
small retailers who are able to access such markets only  through 
intermediaries and may involve larger margins.

A  sober  examination  of the implications  of  retail  trade  by 
foreign  companies  would indicate how  spurious,  misplaced  and 
context-free  these  facile  suggestions  centering  round   some 
mythical  efficiency are. It may be mentioned at the outset  that 
despite  contributing  16 per cent of GDP at current  prices  and 
employing  7.94  per  cent of worksforce,  the  trade  sector  in 
general and retail trade in particular has rarely been studied by 
the economists. As a result, any move to restructure it in a  big 
and  basic way, like by means of letting in FDI in  this  sector, 
goes,  by  and  large,  unnoticed,  as  though  it  were  of   no 
consequence.

Why  is this highly dispersed, low-technology, low-capital,  low-
skill  intensity activity, using largely family labour,  but  now 
moving  towards more organised and modernised forms at  least  in 
the  metropolitan  and  urban areas, is being  eyed  by  the  big 
foreign capital? Part of the answer lies outside India in so  far 
as  various country of origin and supplyside factors  induce  the 
retail  chains, mainly from the Western Europe and North  America 
to extend their diaspora to emerging markets like India. 

This  is an inevitable part of the process of  globalisation  and 
transnationalisation. Flush with financial surpluses, spurred  by 
the oligopolistic-competitive urge to capture ever larger  market 
share,  fortified by a long inning of trading experience in  many 
countries  which helps reduce inventories, provide fresh  avenues 
of  sourcing,  providing cushion against  adverse  conditions  by 
prospects of offsetting losing areas against the expanding  ones, 
it  is  not surprising that the retailing chains  should  try  to 
explore newer pastures.

They  would  add glamour to shopping and bazaars and  be  further 
symbols  of monotonous modernising homogeneity across  countries. 
The  crippled, colonised mindsets would surely find their  appeal 
irresistible,  particularly with the prospects of getting  better 
access to imported goods or at least deshi goods under a  foreign 
banner,  with the hope of a uniform price. For such  detribalised 
sections,  attractive  packaging and brand  names  become  status 
symbols.  It  is such predilections and fads which  are  probably 
inducing  a  government  swearing, for  form's  sake,  by  fierce  
nationalism  both economic and cultural, but in effect,  catering 
to  the cravings of the crowds suffering from an identity  crisis 
which may, at a more fundamental level, be inducing the bosses in 
the  External Affairs Ministry to vociferously push the case  for 
DFI  in  retail trade in India. Given the growing  chasm  between 
India  and Bharat, the powerful votaries of India, despite  their 
Hindutva mask, are bent upon ignoring the disastrous consequences 
of their moves for Bharat. It is not realised that their India is 
a  fictitious non-authentic, grafted construct - an  anomaly  and 
would  ultimately have to pay rather dearly for this mad rush  to 
make  India  a  mimetic, carbon-copy of the  West  in  such  high 
visibility arenas as retail trade.

The thing to realise is that retail trade as an easy entry,  low-
capital  and  skill  intensity  sector  is  a  major  avenue  for 
employment  generation  in  the economy.  Its  presence  is  much 
greater in the informal sector. In a country with highly sluggish 
and  woefully inadequate rate of growth of meaningful  employment 
opportunities,  retailing  in various forms is easily  the  first 
component  of  the coping strategy adopted by  the  fast  growing 
marginalised,  socially-dispensable  hordes  of  outcasts-ranging 
from  the  pavement  vendors and peripatetic  traders  to  street 
corner  grocers,  bakers and confectioners to various  sales  cum 
repair  outlets. Personnelled by men, women and  children,  these 
activities  marry  simple and easy  income-generating  activities 
with  highly  personalised,  tailor-made  consumer   convenience, 
especially  for  the  sections endowed with  low,  uncertain  and 
irregular  purchasing power. Various tiers of other  intermediary 
traders,  related  to  these  lower  rungs  of  retailing,   also 
simultaneously  perform retailing functions which have  not  been 
found  wanting  in  any  serious sense  except  the  tendency  to 
capitalise  on  scarcities  and go in for  tax  evasion.  FDI  in 
retailing  would be at least as much prone to these  temptations, 
sans  the  informal retailing's character of being  a  population 
industry embedded in community links.

In its collectivity trade is a major employer. According to  1991 
census  7.5  per cent of the working population  was  engaged  in 
trade,  as  compared to 4 per cent in 1961 and 6.3  per  cent  in 
1981.  Work opportunities in trade have grown at a  comparatively 
faster pace. During 1977-83, trade sector employment increased at 
6 per cent per annum, next only to the construction sector. 

During  1983-88  and 1988-94, this sector saw  employment  growth 
rate of 3.83 per cent and 3.33 per cent only. During these  later 
years  Indian chain stores have made their forays in many  areas. 
If   large  amounts  of  FDI  are  permitted,  the   displacement 
competition  would  kill a large number  of  self-employment  and 
wage-employment opportunities in trade.

The  Indian economy has witnessed many signs of senility  in  its 
early growth phase, like hyper growth of the service sector. This 
is  a  reflection  of the limited  growth  of  industries,  their 
inappropriateness to our structure and needs. 

Entry  of  FDI and modernised, large-scale retailing  would  make 
this highly competitive sector oligopolistic, reduce  own-account 
work and income earning opportunities by ousting small, pavement, 
street-corner and peripatetic retailers and increase  inequities, 
differentiation and resulting social tensions and unrest. 

The  adverse employment effects of liberalisation,  marketisation 
and  opening  up would reach a flash point, if the  trade  sector 
self-employment  too  falls a prey  to  displacement  competition 
unleashed  by  big  foreign players. The  entry  of  big  foreign 
restaurants  and food processors has made deep inroads  into  the 
market of street corner eating joints and halwais. 

For  satisfying the consumerist fads of a small minority, are  we 
to sacrifice the safety-value employment opportunities offered by 
trade and household industries to the most vulnerable ones?

The  backward  linkages of FDI based retail stores  would  strike 
some  really  lethal  blows to  small  industries  and  artisanal 
household  industries unable to make bulk supplies to  these  big 
retail chains. Those few who survive as dependent units would  be 
unilaterally dominated by these giant trading companies. 

With  impending opening up of the flood gates for the  import  of 
consumers  goods,  even India's big and medium  industries  would 
find  the pitch queered as these foreign chain stores would  find 
it cheaper to push imported goods into Indian markets where there 
is a widespread special penchant for foreign goods. 

Among  the many factors which go to point a dismal  scenario  for 
the Indian economy in the wake of the full implementation of  the 
WTO  dictates,  the  entry  of foreign  retailers  would  find  a 
prominent place. As of now, retailing is attractive to the FDI as 
it  can make do with India's existing  inadequate  infrastructure 
unlike manufacturing. 

Then,  retailing does not face demand constraint like that  faced 
by  manufacturing.  But how does it help India? By  weaning  away 
existing  high spenders, such FDI only  intensifies  displacement 
competition.

It  may  be mentioned that realising the poor  employment  growth 
potential of catching up industrialistion, Japan, in addition  to 
employment-friendly  land reforms, and subcontracting,  continued 
with labour-intensive construction sector and mom and pop  stores 
by  excluding the entry of big money, both local and alien,  into 
these areas. 

That a government supposedly based on the support of lower middle 
class  trading  community support is all set to strike  a  deadly 
blow to this section, triggering off waves of displacement,  only 
proves  that their market fundamentalism is basically  wedded  to 
the  interests  of  big  money, both  Indian  and  foreign.  This 
component  of  second  generation reforms  is  really  a  ominous 
portend for the Indian economy. 

Kamal Nayan Kabra
