
A mission makes all the difference


THE  singular question which seems to disturb most  middle  level 
managers  (who  are  in their thirties)  in  the  current  Indian 
context  is  about where their company is going;  what  is  their 
corporate culture and core competence; whether they are  adequate 
to cope with the demands of globalisation of the market' and what 
management  qualities  and virtues are necessary  to  make  their 
company  continue  to succeed over the next quarter in  the  21st 
century.  In effect, what the managers are seeking is a sense  of 
purpose,  a  sense  of  identity, or shall we  say,  a  sense  of 
mission.  They  want  something  more than  a  mere  salary,  job 
security, or an avenue for career development: they want a  cause 
which is satisfying to their soul.

Many managers misunderstand the nature and importance of mission, 
while some others do not even consider it, or recognise it. Peter 
Drucker  declared, as far back as 1973: ``That  business  purpose 
and  business  mission are so rarely given  adequate  thought  is 
perhaps  the  most important cause of  business  frustration  and 
failure.'' Sadly, even today, this comment seems to be valid  and 
true.

A corporate mission is much more than good intentions and  ideas. 
It  represents  the framework for the entire  business,  and  the 
values  which drive the company, and the faith which  the  people 
have  in  themselves.  Managers imbued with  a  strong  sense  of 
mission are more effective in their jobs. They enable the company 
to fulfil the aspirations and needs of all its stakeholders  such 
as customers, employees, suppliers, and shareholders. 

The  only  sacred  cow  in  a  company  is  its  basic   business 
philosophy.If corporate captains can draw and define clearly  and 
precisely  the  missions  for their companies,  and  share  these 
missions with their employees; then, the employees will feel that 
they are part and parcel of their companies, and their commitment 
to achieve the objectives of their companies will be  reinforced. 
Defining  a  mission  is essentially a  creative  endeavour.  You 
cannot arrive at a mission by an intellectual analysis alone,  or 
by   interaction  with  people  during  management  courses   and 
seminars.  It  is born out of insight and  understanding;  it  is 
inspiratory  and evocative. Quite a few management thinkers  have 
given mission only a cursory treatment. Some speak about  mission 
as if it is commercial evangelism; while some others refer to  it 
as  a strong corporate culture. Some view mission as an  esoteric 
and eccentric preoccupation, which haunts the senior echelons  in 
management.

There  is yet another view, almost opposite to this,  which  sees 
mission  as  the bedrock of a company's strength,  identity,  and 
success  -  its  ultimate character and  personality.  All  these 
descriptions  are both true and false. They are  different  views 
and  versions  based on the individual knowledge  and  experience  
gained  by different management scholars. It resembles the  story 
of six blind men trying to describe an elephant, by touching  and 
feeling  whatever  area  of  its  anatomy  they  can  reach,  and 
formulating therefrom a picture of the pachyderm.

National mission

Every country has its own culture based on social, economic,  and 
political milieu in which it operates. From that culture  springs 
forth the national ethos, which provides its population with  the 
principles and guidelines of life, which, in other words, is  the 
mission for that nation. Logically and naturally, such a  mission 
will impart its shadow on the industrial life and culture in that 
country. The national mission will have its impact and  influence 
on the mission and philosophy of its trade and commerce.

The U.K. for instance, was an imperial power to be reckoned  with 
during  the  19th Century. ``The Sun never sets  in  the  British 
empire''  was a statement of fact both in history and  geography. 
The British mission during that period was to rule the world,  as 
it  were.  The  economic  dominance  not  only  in  its  colonial 
territory, but also in foreign trade, and international  monetary 
exchange  was a true reflection of its political  supremacy.  The 
pound  sterling  was  a mighty currency,  while  the  dollar  was 
relatively  insignificant.  From the onset of the  20th  century, 
however, the decline and fall of this empire began: and so  also, 
its economic eminence in the world market.

Japan  was  reduced to dust in 1945. Its  rehabilitation  started 
with a determination to succeed, and restore the economy. Quality 
and  productivity  were  at the centre  stage  in  this  economic 
revolution.  Today,  Japan rules the roost, and the rest  of  the 
world  mere followers of its national philosophy  of  management. 
Here  again,  the spirit of the political culture  and  ethos  is 
responsible for the revival of the national economy.

Adventurism, enterprise, and exploration were the  characteristic 
features of the early settlers in America, all of whom left their 
land  of  origin  in  search of the new  world.  The  history  of 
industrial and economic development of the U.S. ever since is  an 
illustrious saga of entrepreneurial will and wisdom. Politics and 
economics  are  two  sides of the same coin: they  sail  or  sink 
together.  So  also, the culture and mission of  a  company  will 
always  bear  testimony to the contemporary  political  supremacy 
enjoyed by the country of its origin.Broadly speaking, there  are 
two  schools of thought: one approach describes mission in  terms 
of business strategy; while the other defines mission in terms of 
ethics and culture. The strategy school of thought views  mission 
primarily  as  a strategic tool, an intellectual  exercise  which 
seeks  to expound the commercial rationale of a business. It  was 
Mr.  Ted  Levitt  who first wrote about the  strategy  school  of 
mission  in  Harvard  Business Review, nearly 40  years  ago.  He 
argued  that  companies  define  their  business  objectives  too 
narrowly.

According to him, a railway company must perceive its business as 
transportation;  an oil company must see its business as  energy; 
and  a company manufacturing cans must see itself as a  packaging 
industry.  In other words, the focus must be on the customer  and 
his  needs, rather than production technology. Good  strategy  is 
about  finding  a  better  way to  run  the  business,  than  the 
competitors.

The second school of thought argues that mission is the  cultural 
force,  which  enables a company to function as  a  cohesive  and 
collective  entity. As against the strategic concept of  mission, 
the  cultural perspective tends to capture the emotional  aspects 
in  a company; it is concerned with generating cooperation  among 
employees through shared values, and standards of behaviour. This 
cultural  glue made up of norms and values binds people  together 
in teams, influences their behaviour and social interaction,  and 
leads  them  to  push  and persevere  with  the  goals  of  their 
corporation. According to this view of mission, the company  will 
function  under  the business philosophy  wherein  the  employees 
perceive  and interpret events from a common platform, and  speak 
the ``same language''.

Is it possible to reconcile these two different perceptions?  Are 
they  mutually exclusive, or are they complementary? They can  be 
reconciled  into  a  common  cause. Mission  is  an  issue  which 
involves both the heart (culture), and the mind (strategy) of  an 
employee.  The  strategy element of mission  legislates  what  is 
important  to  the commercial future of the company.  The  values 
element of mission legislates what is important to the culture of 
the  company.  When the two are in tune, the mission  is  strong. 
When there are inconsistencies, the mission is weak.

There  are three types of companies in the business  world,  from 
the  viewpoint of the purpose for which they exist and  function. 
The first type of company claims to exist for the benefit of  its 
shareholders. Their purpose is to maximise generation of  wealth. 
All  decisions  are taken against the  yardstick  of  shareholder 
benefit.  The  second  type  exists  not  only  to  satisfy   its 
shareholders, but also its other stakeholders such as  customers, 
employees,  suppliers, and society. The third one is not  content 
with  the ostensible purpose of satisfying only the  stakeholder, 
and his needs. It seeks to identify a purpose, an ideal which  is 
far  greater  than the combined needs of  all  the  stakeholders. 
Business leaders will find it easier to impart a sense of mission 
to their employees, if they project a purpose which is aimed at a 
higher ideal. Purposes expressed in terms of stakeholders tend to 
highlight  only  their specific and  selfish  interests;  whereas 
purposes  aimed  at a lofty level have no room  for  such  vested 
interests, or at least, they will dampen their legitimacy.

In  order  to achieve a purpose in competition, there must  be  a 
strategy.  Strategy will define the business that the company  is 
going to compete in, the position that the company plans to  hold 
in  that business, and the distinctive competence or  competitive 
advantage. For example, if the purpose is to create wealth, there  
must be a strategy to explain how to create wealth in competition 
with  other  companies.  Strategy is,  therefore,  a  significant 
component of mission, because it relates purpose and behaviour to 
each other.

R. DEVARAJAN
