
Ceilings raised for cotton yarn exports


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 4. The Ministry of Textile today approved raising 
of  ceilings  for export of cotton yarns for  the  calendar  year 
2000. The new ceilings on export of cotton yarn of 40s and  below 
counts  have been fixed at 500 million kg and that for hank  yarn 
of below 60s at 20 million kg.

The  decision is aimed at providing further boost to  the  cotton 
yarn exports. It has been prompted by the rising trend in exports 
of  cotton yarn. The necessary notification raising  the  ceiling 
will be issued by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry soon.

The  ceiling for calendar year 1999 pegged at 200 million  kg  in 
January was subsequently revised to 300 million kg in June. 

At the same time, the Textile Ministry has opted for retention of 
major features its policy for export of cotton yarn as was  being 
implemented  in 1999. The 100 per cent export oriented units  and 
export promotion zone units will continue to enjoy exemption from 
the  ceiling  for export of cotton yarn of 40s and  below  counts 
without  any count or domestic cotton use restrictions.  However, 
these  exports  would  be subject to the  over  all  quantitative 
ceiling of 500 million kg.

Also  in  the  exempt category will be  exports  made  under  the 
advance licensing scheme or on the basis of cotton imported under 
the open general licence (OGL) or by the export promotion capital 
goods  units.  In order to reap the benefits  of  the  exemption, 
these   units   will  have  to  meet  their   annualised   export 
obligations.

It may be recalled that the Ministry had received representations 
from  cotton  manufacturers asking it to raise the  ceiling.  The 
rising  trends  in  the exports of cotton yarn  in  1999  further 
enthused  the  Government  to revise the ceiling  on  exports  of 
cotton yarn. 

According to the Ministry, the ceiling has been revised in such a 
way that it would ensure adequate supplies of cotton yarn to  the 
decentralised  handloom  and  powerloom  sectors  at   reasonable 
prices,  besides  maintaining continuity in cotton  yarn  exports 
without  affecting competitiveness of higher value  added  cotton 
fabrics, made-ups and garment exports. 
