
Resetting the stage for the next millennium


THE  DEDICATED band of young men and women who are being  groomed 
for  corporate governance in business and industry for  the  21st 
Century,  are the ones who will graduate in the next three  years 
from the prestigious management/business schools of the country.

With the development of new strategies aiming at optimum focus on 
employee-customer relationship; and, notwithstanding the  quantum 
jump in the expansion and diversification, the decision-makers of 
tomorrow  will  have no choice but to equip themselves  with  the 
state-of-the-art  tools  and techniques, to  be  successful.  The 
future business-edifice, as has been aptly stressed by a  leading 
business-house,  would be supported by the four pillars,  namely, 
customerisation,    peoplisation,    institutionalisation,    and 
strategisation.

Opinions  differ  widely  as to how to develop the  CEOs  of  the 
future, so as to enable them to scale the challenging heights  in 
an  aggressively  competitive  world  of  economic  regeneration. 
Knowledge,  competence  and team-building are the  basic  traits, 
time-tested  and  universally accepted transcending  barriers  of 
regions/  time-zones. But since the stakes would be high  in  the 
21st  century,  these  business  leaders  would  need  to  imbibe 
additional inputs, professional/qualitative to cope up with their 
assigned tasks.

As  the  country's economic horizons stretch  outwards,  business 
leaders  of  the  21st century would need  early  baptisation  in 
entrepreneurship.  The  mantle of building the  organisation  and 
also steering it through with a matching success, by providing  a 
commensurate putsch, would fall on their shoulders. They would be 
the primary group-resource, their aim would be to make the  whole 
organisation  capable of making effective economic decisions.  As 
complete  managers  they will have holistic  perspective  of  the 
entire business.

An eye for innovation

``An eye for innovation'' would be the sine-qua-non; since it  is 
only through systematic innovation that a competitive edge  would 
be  maintained  and  long-term  strategic  intent  for   economic 
regeneration  would be developed. Innovation would become a  part 
and  parcel  of the business activity and its  close  interaction 
with the organisation's resources and economic exploitation would 
need to be of a higher order.

The 21st century business leaders will deal with a workforce  (in 
the  changed scenario they will be in charge of work and  not  of 
people)  which  would  be  different  from  the  earlier   times. 
Hitherto, the thrust was on mastering the skills through constant 
practice;   workers   never   got  tempted   to   improve   their 
qualifications.  But  with  the massive  expansion  of  education  
facilities,  the  next  generation  of  workers  will  be  highly 
qualified. They will work more with their minds rather than  with 
their hands.

In  the  changed  scenario,  it will  be  the  business  leader's 
prerogative to preside-over the destinies of this enlightened lot 
and  the  worker's  motivation will be a real  challenge  to  his 
managerial acumen. Productivity linkages, where an upward  growth 
is attributed to better standards of education of the  workforce, 
such a backdrop is alien to our country. But the stage is already 
set in this direction and one cannot afford to ignore it.

The business leaders of tomorrow will be conducting business that 
will  mostly operate beyond the national boundaries. It would  be 
more  and  more  multinational in the true  sense  of  the  word. 
Diverse   cultures,   multiplicity  of  traditions   and   ethnic 
backgrounds,  need  for fluency in partner country's  language  - 
even dealing with the workforce drawn from more than one country; 
these would be the environment in which the CEOs of 21st  century 
will be conducting their operations.

Closer interaction

In  the  coming  years,  there  would  be  a  higher  degree   of 
interaction   with  various  agencies,  namely  with   Government 
institutions  within the country and abroad,  industrial  houses, 
non-governmental organisations, United Nations organisations  and 
even  with  the  universities  and  research  establishment.  The 
business   leaders   will  have  to  learn  as   to   how   these 
establishments   function;  what  is  the  rationale   of   their 
operations,   procedures   and   techniques   and   also    their 
profitability  profiles. Lastly, they will have to devise  matrix 
to  integrate  the  above  parameters  -  to  promote  their  own 
organisations.

The  21st  century  is a century of  economy.  Enhanced  economic 
activity would give birth to new management tools. There would be 
ample challenges for the business leaders of tomorrow to  develop 
a new technology-tactics mix and understand market, industry  and 
business better than before.

D. C. Bakshi
