
The guiding principle


Purpose  and  strategy will become empty  intellectual  pursuits, 
unless they can be converted into action, transformed into policy 
and  guidelines for behaviour, which will help people  to  decide 
what  to do on a pragmatic and down-to-earth basis. Human  beings 
are  emotional:  in  order  to  capture  and  capitalise  on  the 
emotional  energy  of a company, the mission needs to  furnish  a 
moral  or philosophical platform for behaviour to  run  alongside 
its  commercial criterion. This brings us to the next element  in 
our definition of mission.

Values  are  the  beliefs and moral  principles  of  a  company's 
culture.  It  is the foundation on which the  company  is  built. 
Values  provide the raison d'etre for a company; they  provide  a 
meaning to the norms and behaviour standards in a company.  Thus, 
we  understand that purpose, strategy, behaviour  standards,  and 
values  constitute  the four components of a  mission:  a  strong 
mission will permeate in a company, where these four constituents 
flourish and reinforce each other.

A  sense of mission is an emotional commitment. Some people  feel 
and possess this sense of mission: whereas there are others,  who 
do not feel such an emotional bondage. A sense of mission  occurs 
when there is a congruence of values between the company and  the 
employee.  For example, if the corporate behaviour standard  lays 
stress  upon cooperation and collaboration; and if an  individual 
employee by nature is cooperative and helpful, then there will be 
a match of values between him and the company.

It is the confluence of values which promote a sense of  mission; 
it  is  through values that individuals experience  an  emotional 
identity  with the company. Strategy does not necessarily  create 
compatibility between an employee and the company. There are many 
managers  who  are in intellectual agreement with  the  company's 
purpose and strategy; but that does not per se translate into  an 
emotional  involvement;  to that extent the implementation  of  a 
strategic  plan  will  suffer  default.  It  is  only  when   the 
individual  identifies himself with the framework of  values  and 
behaviour  norms  in  a  company,  that  is  when  his  emotional 
commitment  comes to pass, it is, then strategy will turn into  a 
mission.

People  are  always looking for something more than  a  mere  and 
normal existence. The mundanity and humdrum of day-to-day  living 
does  not  satisfy them. They constantly seek and  strive  for  a 
larger and deeper meaning of life. Values provide them with  this 
meaning.  When  an individual works in concert with  a  group  of 
people operating with harmonious values in the company, he  finds 
and  feels a sense of fulfilment and satisfaction. The  void  and 
vacuum  earlier encountered by him is dissolved. Work  becomes  a 
joy  and  a  pleasure, because it is imbued with  a  nobility  of 
purpose;  it  uplifts him into an exalted state,  and  gives  him  
intrinsic happiness.

In this context, it is useful to understand the basic  difference 
between  what  is  vision, and what is mission,  as  there  is  a 
tendency  to  confuse these two concepts. In order  to  select  a 
proper course of direction, a business leader must first  develop 
and  formulate  a mental image of a viable and  desirable  future 
state of the company. This image is what is known as a vision.  A 
vision  articulates a realistic, credible, and attractive  future 
for  the  company;  a state which will be  far  better  from  the 
current business scenario.

A  vision  and a mission, sometimes, can be one and the  same.  A 
possible and desirable future state of a company may include  all 
the  elements  of mission namely,  purpose,  strategy,  behaviour 
standards, and values. The differentiating criterion, however, is 
that while vision refers to a future state, mission concerns  the 
current  state  as  well. When a vision is  accomplished,  it  is 
replaced  by  a  new vision, because  growth  and  expansion  are 
mandatory  for a company to survive. However, the mission  has  a 
relatively longer span of validity and relevance; quite often  it 
is timeless and infinite. A vision is more involved with a  goal, 
whereas a mission is more associated with a way of behaviour.

Today, the business world has become more competitive and market-
driven.  Companies  which are not clear about their  values,  and 
which have not won the commitment of their employees will find it 
difficult  to  survive, leave alone succeed.  A  management  team 
equipped  with a mission is likely to outperform such  others  in 
the  field who have no mission. As we are asking the managers  to 
become  more conscious and cognisant of the emotional  and  moral 
aspects of their companies, it is imperative to explain how  such 
attention  and  action  will  lead  to  better  performance.  The 
benefits  are  derived  from two sources:  from  the  clarity  of 
direction  which  flows and follows as a  consequence,  when  you 
define  a  mission;  secondly, from  the  collective  commitment, 
loyalty, and zeal emanating from the individuals who are injected 
with the spirit of mission.

The mission team will have value as well as strategic intents  to 
guide it while taking decisions. When taking strategic decisions, 
senior  managers are all at sea, as they are mostly dealing  with 
ambiguous, complex, and uncertain issues, in which no clear right 
or wrong is manifest. After taking into account all the available 
facts  and  figures, they are more often inclined  to  depend  on 
their personal intuition and judgment.

In such a context, a clear and authentic conceptual framework  of 
values  will  be an excellent source to engineer  consistent  and 
uniform  decisions. Managers rely more often on  their  corporate 
mission, which defines and delineates their business  philosophy, 
when  taking  impromptu  decisions.  By  experiencing  the  links 
between  strategy and purpose on the one-hand, and between  value 
and  purpose on the other hand, the managers are more  likely  to 
stay on track and steer on course. 

Companies  with  clear  missions are more  fastidious  about  the 
people  they  employ  and promote. The  parameters  of  selection 
stretch  beyond  the  traditional  range  comprising   education, 
experience,  skill level, and leadership evidence. What  kind  of 
people  will mesh and meet with the culture of the company  is  a 
major criterion.

Companies  with  strong  missions always have  strong  norms  and 
behaviour  standards.  Their employees adhere to such  clear  and 
strict  codes  of conduct, which ipso facto endow  them  with  an 
overall  corporate  loyalty, rather than  departmental  affinity. 
They  find it easier to trust their colleagues, and overcome  the 
petty  and ubiquitous work rivalry and suspicion.  Strong  shared 
values foster a healthy and less cynical view of their peers, and 
a deeper regard for the basic objectives of the company. A  sense 
of mission may not altogether eliminate power games, and personal 
idiosyncrasies, but it will certainly defuse and reduce them to a 
manageable extent.

A  mission  statement is the enunciation of  a  company's  avowed 
mission. It can help to clarify an issue, or a point of order; it 
can  serve as a symbol for the common cause shared by the  people 
in  the company; it can, also, help such individuals who are  led 
astray to be brought back to the right track. A mission statement 
is  akin to the constitution of a country; it is like the  gospel 
of a religion. In a company, a mission statement must be seen  as 
a document sacrosanct and inviolable: it encapsulates the guiding 
principles of behaviour and conduct, for its employees to follow.

Creating a mission is an intellectual process, because mission is 
an  intellectual concept. It deals with the logic which  connects 
behaviour  to  purpose.  Whereas  convincing  and  converting  an 
industrial population to accept and adopt the mission is part  of 
socialisation, and an emotional process. The employees are buying 
into a new philosophy of action. It will take time for a  mission 
to  get into the bloodstream of a company. It will take  time  to 
align  the  behaviour patterns in a company with its  values.  It 
will  take  further time to align the company's values  with  the 
values of its employees.Converting a company to a new mission  is 
akin to converting a community to a new religion. It has all  the 
pains  and  characteristics  of proselytism.  It  is,  therefore, 
obvious that such a change will not endure.

In  order  to create a resonance between strategy and  values  as 
well  as propound the behaviour mode in a company, managers  need 
to   continue  with  the  process  of  thinking,  analysis,   and 
experimentation  for  a fairly long time.  Working  with  mission 
demands  devotion and dedication of a high degree. It is in  this 
passion  for mission that we find an opportunity  par  excellence 
for improvement and progress.

R. Devarajan
