
Overseas medical insurance policies - whether covered under  Sec. 80D


QUESTION:  Sec. 80D of the Income-tax Act provides for  deduction 
in  respect  of medical insurance premia paid by  cheque  on  the 
health  of the assessee or his spouse or parents up to a  maximum 
of  Rs.  10,000. Newly inserted proviso to  Sec.  80D(1)  through 
Finance  Act,  1999, provides for permissible deduction  in  this 
regard  up  to  a maximum of Rs. 15,000 in  the  case  of  senior 
citizens in relation to assessment year 2000-2001.

Could  you  kindly  clarify,  whether  such  deduction  will   be 
permissible  in  respect  of medical insurance  premia  paid  for 
overseas  medical insurance policy taken for short  periods,  say 
three   months/six  months  to  cover  stay  abroad?  If  it   is 
admissible, then whether in the case of Videsh Yatra Mitra policy 
which  covers other items apart from medical insurance,  can  one 
claim  deduction  of medical insurance premium up to  the  amount 
payable for overseas medical insurance policy?

ANSWER:  Sec.  80D allows medical insurance premia to  cover  the 
health  of the assessee, spouse, dependent parents and  dependent 
children  subject to maximum of Rs. 10,000 from  assessment  year 
2000-2001. Senior citizens are entitled to a higher deduction  of 
Rs.  15,000.  But  proviso to Sec. 80D makes it  clear  that  the 
policy  should  be  in accordance with a scheme  framed  in  this 
behalf by the General Insurance Corporation of India and that  it 
should  have  been  approved by the Central  Government  in  this 
behalf. 

The scheme that has been approved under Sec. 80D is described  as 
``Hospitalisation and Domicilary Hospitalisation Benefit Policy". 
Policies  framed according to this scheme are only  eligible  for 
deduction  under  Sec. 80D. The very first clause of  the  scheme 
confines  the  benefits to ``80 per cent of the  amount  of  such 
expenses  as  are actually and necessarily  incurred  in  respect 
thereof anywhere in India...."

Hence,  overseas  medical insurance policy and much  less  Videsh 
Yatra Mitra will not be covered under Sec. 80D.

Gold deposit scheme

Q: Could you give some details about Gold Deposit Scheme?

A: Gold Deposit Scheme has been notified in GSR No. 634(E)  dated 
September 14, 1999 (1999) 240 ITR (St.) 1. This has been made  in 
pursuance  of the announcement in the Budget for  1999-2000.  The 
notification  is  a short one. It empowers the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  to  designate banks authorised for operating  the  scheme, 
collect gold tendered by a subscriber in the form of bars,  coins 
and gold jewellery against receipt described as Gold Certificate. 
The  receipt  would  be for the gold on its  being  `assayed  and 
accepted' by the bank.  

The  receipt  at the option of the depositor need not be  in  the 
form of gold certificate but can well be in the form of statement 
of accounts or a passbook apparently for the benefit of those who 
would  like to operate the same by deposit and withdrawal.  There 
can  be a lock-in-period after which it is open to the  depositor 
to  withdraw the same even prematurely either gold or  equivalent 
amount in value in cash, whether from bond or account. Nomination 
facility is also available. Gold certificates are transferable by 
endorsement  and delivery. The scheme would remain in force  only 
till further notice.

The gist of the scheme has been given in the preceding paragraph. 
More details can be known only from the designated banks. Nominal 
interest  is also given, while the scheme more or  less  provides 
for custody of customers' gold without charge with the benefit of 
increased  value of gold or for that matter, subject to the  loss 
of fall in value, which at any rate will be the same, if the gold 
had  been  kept  in  personal custody.  The  small  interest  is, 
therefore,  not  comparable with interest on  other  investments, 
where the principal is returned only with reference to the  money 
value.  Hence, gold deposit scheme should be welcome for  persons 
who keep sizable amount of gold idle in locker or at home. 

TDS on rent

Q:  I  have a dispute with a tenant. I have moved the  court  for 
fixation  of  fair rent, while the company has  been  paying  the 
monthly  rent previously fixed. Suddenly they have increased  the 
tax  deduction  at source on the ground that they  are  providing 
rent  demanded  by  me in their books and  that  they  have  been 
advised to deduct tax on that basis. Is this right?

A:  Sec. 194-I requires deduction of tax at source (TDS) even  at 
the  time  of credit of rent to the account of the  payee  or  on 
payment  of  cash  or cheque as long as  the  gross  rent  amount 
exceeds  Rs.  1.20  lakhs per annum. Even credit  to  a  suspense 
account  or account in any other name for this purpose  would  be 
treated  as  credit to the payee. Probably, the amount  had  been 
credited to a provision account in the books of the payer. 

How  far  is  the  deduction warranted, when  the  matter  is  in 
dispute? Sec. 194-I does not provide for such a situation, but  a 
disputed rent credited to a suspense account cannot possibly give 
rise to TDS, because a disputed amount pending in a court  cannot 
be taken as due till the matter is adjudicated upon by the  court 
or  is accepted by the payer himself following the  rationale  of 
the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  Hindustan  Housing  and   Land 
Development  Trust (1986) 161 ITR 524. Even so, the  apprehension 
of the payer cannot be ruled out as unjustified. The taxpayer  in 
such  a case could get authorisation from the  assessing  officer 
for deduction at a lower rate as warranted in his case by  making 
an application in Form No. 13 to the assessing officer under Sec. 
197 of the Act.

S. Rajaratnam
