
Background, purview and penal provisions


It  is a matter of surprise and concern that a bill of such  far-
reaching  implications should have had such scant  attention  and 
scrutiny  from  the  professions, the press  and  Parliament.  In 
contrast,  the  run-up  to  the passing  of  the  IRDA  Bill  was 
exciting, says S. Balakrishnan

THE  troika  of  important  economic  legislation,  namely,   the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) Bill, 1999, 
the  Foreign  Exchange  Management Bill  (FEMA),  1999,  and  the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Bill, 1999, were on the anvil  for 
a considerably long time and could not be enacted due to  various 
well  publicised compulsions. The three have now been  passed  by 
the Lok Sabha - the first two, namely, IRDA and FEMA bills,  have 
received  the nod of the elders, and with no delay  envisaged  in 
getting  the  assent of the President, should be in  the  statute 
book  in the current year itself. The Money Laundering  Bill  has 
surprisingly  been referred to a ten member select  committee  of 
the Rajya Sabha.

The  FEMA which aims ``to consolidate and amend the law  relating 
to  foreign exchange with the objective of facilitating  external 
trade and payments and for promoting the orderly development  and 
maintenance  of  foreign exchange markets in India",  has  had  a 
chequered career. It will be interesting to find out whether  the 
omission  of  the  word `receipts'  after  `external  trade'  was 
deliberate,  or a victim of casual drafting. FEMA is to take  the 
place  of  the `dreaded' Foreign Exchange  Regulation  Act,  1973 
(FERA).

It  is a matter of surprise and concern that a bill of such  far-
reaching  implications should have had such scant  attention  and 
scrutiny  from  the  professions, the press  and  Parliament.  In 
contrast, the run-up to the passing of the IRDA Bill was exciting 
-  there were fruitful and sometimes intemperate  discussions  at 
all the fora concerned. Probably the IRDA received the  attention 
it  got  because the insurance industry  employs  thousands  with 
powerful unions with political connections. 

In the case of FEMA, there is no such `attraction' for  political 
parties to take advantage of. Is it not amazing and also alarming 
that  the FEMA Bill introduced in the Lok Sabha on  November  29, 
was  passed just two days later, that too at the fag end  of  the 
day with barely 30 members present in the House? 

Background

The FERA reflected the compulsions of a highly regulatory system, 
when  anything `foreign', especially MNCs, were looked upon  with 
suspicion.  It  was  amended  in  1993  as  a  sequel  ``to   the 
liberalisation  in trade/industrial policies and for  creating  a 
more  conducive climate for attracting foreign direct  investment  
with  a  view to increasing production  and  promoting  exports". 
Several amendments were enacted as ``part of the ongoing  process 
of  economic liberalisation relating to foreign  investments  and 
foreign trade for closer interaction with the world economy".

Additionally,  in  the  earlier two years, through  a  series  of 
notifications by the Central Government/ Reserve Bank, steps  had 
been taken to reduce the rigours and irrationalities of FERA  and 
to bring it in line with the then economic realities.

In  1993,  amendments, inter alia, sought to  give  assurance  of 
permanence to the changes in the parent Act made by the issue  of 
notifications.  Various facilities were extended to  foreign/FERA 
companies  on  matters  such  as  appointment  of  technical  and 
management   advisers,  opening  of  branches,   acquisition   of 
immovable  property, borrowing of money, acceptance  of  deposits 
and  the  like.  Facilities were also  extended  to  non-resident 
Indians,  Indian  companies  and residents  for  the  opening  of 
foreign currency accounts in India following the introduction  of 
partial  convertibility.  NRIs  returning  to  the  country  were 
exempted  from  making  declarations on their  arrival  in  India 
regarding their assets abroad and from the requirements of  prior 
approval for the acquisition of immovable property in India. FERA 
companies  were  also  allowed to acquire whole or  part  of  any 
undertaking in India, of any person or company carrying on trade, 
commerce   or  industry  excepting  agriculture  and   plantation 
activity.

According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the 
FEMA, ``significant developments have taken place since 1993 such 
as  substantial  increase  in  the  country's  foreign   exchange 
reserves,  growth in foreign trade, rationalisation  of  tariffs, 
current   account   convertibility,  liberalisation   of   Indian 
investments  abroad,  increased  access  to  external  commercial 
borrowing  by  Indian  corporates and  participation  of  foreign 
institutional investors in the Indian stock markets". Keeping  in 
view these developments the Government decided to repeal the FERA 
and enact the FEMA in its place.

Purview

It  was reported that the only point raised by the Opposition  in 
the  Lok Sabha on the short discussion on FEMA was  on  ``capital 
account  liberalisation".  The  Finance  Minister  allayed   this 
apprehension  with ease, saying, ``while the Bill paves  the  way 
for  current  account liberalisation, it does not  propel  us  to 
capital    account    liberalisation.   We   will    move    very 
cautiously........  We  will  never take risks  that  expose  the 
country to unnecessary hardships".

What  does  `current account transaction' mean? The  Bill  itself 
provides   the   answer.  `Current  account   transaction   means 
transaction other than a capital account transaction........  and 
includes (a) payments due in connection with foreign trade, other 
current  business,  services and short-term  banking  and  credit  
facilities in the ordinary course of business; (b) payment due as 
interest  on  loans  and  as net  income  from  investments;  (c) 
remittances  for living expenses of parents, spouse and  children 
residing  abroad,  and (d) expenses in  connection  with  foreign 
travel,  education  and  medical  care  of  parents,  spouse  and 
children.

On the other hand, `capital account transaction' has been defined 
as  a  transaction  which  alters  the  assets  or   liabilities, 
including  contingent  liabilities,  outside  India  of   persons 
resident  in India or assets or liabilities in India  of  persons 
resident outside India. And `person' includes, in addition to  an 
individual,  a  company, any agency, office or  branch  owned  or 
controlled  by  such  person.  The  Reserve  Bank  can  also,  by 
regulation, prohibit, restrict or regulate transactions  relating 
to securities including foreign securities, borrowing or  lending 
in  rupees  or  foreign exchange,  deposits,  export,  import  or 
holding  of currency, and immovable properties, as applicable  to 
persons  resident both in India and abroad. The Reserve Bank,  in 
consultation with the Central Government, will specify the  types 
of  capital  account transactions which are permissible  and  the 
limit   to  which  foreign  exchange  is  admissible   for   such 
transactions.

It is well known that the country is under constant and sustained 
pressure   from  developed  nations,  the  World  Bank  and   the 
International  Monetary Fund, to allow convertibility on  capital 
account also. Successive governments have so far wisely  resisted 
this demand, taking cover under the genuine plea that the country 
is  still  not  ready  for  a  measure  of  this  importance  and 
magnitude.  From  hindsight  this seems to have  been  the  right 
decision  in  the  light of what happened  to  the  economies  of 
Thailand, Korea and Malaysia in the recent past because of this.

In  addition to current and capital account  transactions,  there 
are  provisions  in  the Bill on dealings  in  foreign  exchange, 
holding  of  foreign  exchange, export  of  goods  and  services, 
realisation  and repatriation of foreign exchange  and  exemption 
from  realisation  and repatriation in certain  cases.  There  is 
nothing out of the way in these provisions.

Further,  the  Bill combines in one  chapter  called  `Authorised 
Persons'  the powers and liabilities of people empowered to  deal 
in  foreign exchange, including money-changers. The earlier  FERA 
had  mentioned  two distinct agencies  `Authorized  Dealers'  and 
Money-changers' for this purpose.

Penal provisions

The  scanty press reports on the discussion in the Lok  Sabha  on 
FEMA  referred to `stringent penalties for violation  of  foreign 
exchange  norms'. This aspect will now be examined. It has to  be 
mentioned at this point and as stressed by the Secretary, Central 
Vigilance Commission, that ``FERA was necessary at the time  when 
there was financial emergency and there was a need to uplift  the  
economy  and to make available foreign exchange for the  country. 
FEMA  has  now been introduced when there is  sufficient  foreign 
exchange  but  proper  financial  management  is  required.   The 
regulatory  powers  of  FERA have new been  shifted  to  the  new 
Prevention  of  Money  Laundering Bill"  (Chartered  Secretary  - 
November  1998).  This important aspect has to be borne  in  mind 
when  discussing the penal provisions of FEMA and also  comparing 
them with those in FERA.

(1)  FEMA  classifies  violation  of  its  provisions  into   two 
categories,  `quantifiable'  and  `not  quantifiable'.  For   any 
quantifiable  violation, the infringer is liable to a penalty  up 
to  twice the sum involved. In cases where amounts or values  are 
not  quantifiable, the penalty can be up to a lakh of rupees.  In 
both  cases, the same quantum of additional penalty  is  leviable 
when the contravention is a continuing one.

On  the  other hand, FERA makes no such distinction and  in  both 
types  of contravention, the penalty can be up to five times  the 
amount or value involved or Rs. 5,000 whichever is more.

(2)  If the penalty is not paid within 90 days,  FEMA  stipulates 
that  the contravener is liable to civil imprisonment. He can  be 
detained  up to three years when the penalty exceeds Rs. 1  crore 
and  up  to  six months in other cases. The  detainee  is  to  be 
released even during the period of detention if the liability  is 
cleared.  He cannot be arrested a second time after  his  release 
for the same violation even if the penalty remains unpaid.

Under FERA also, a person who defaults in payment of any penalty, 
can be imprisoned for a term up to two years or with fine or with 
both.

(3)  FEMA bars the jurisdiction of the civil court in respect  of 
matters to be dealt with by the Adjudicating Authority or by  the 
Appellate Tribunal.

In  contrast,  FERA  provides that in addition to  any  award  of 
penalty,  the  infringer can also be detained under orders  of  a 
court for a term which shall not be less than six months but  not 
more  than seven years and a fine if the amount or value  of  the 
contravention  exceeds Rs. 1 lakh and up to three years  or  with 
fine or with both in other cases.

(4)  Surprisingly, FEMA does not seem to have any  provision  for 
recovery  of  dues. This in essence means that an  infringer  can 
enjoy  his ill-gotten wealth without fear of further  prosecution 
or with recovery proceedings, once he is released from detention. 
This is disturbing.

On  the other hand, FERA provides that arrears of penalty can  be 
recovered by collectors as if they are arrears of land revenue.

It  is interesting to note that FEMA's sister Bill on  Prevention 
of  Money Laundering empowers the authorities concerned  to  take  
recourse  to recovery proceedings as laid down in the  Income-tax 
Act, that is, arrears of penalty can be recovered in the same way 
as a Tax Recovery Officer recovers tax arrears.

(5) FERA had a healthy provision that a court while convicting an 
infringer  could also impose the condition that the person  shall 
not  carry  on  business  which  was  likely  to  facilitate  the 
commission  of  such  offence for a period  not  exceeding  three 
years. FEMA is silent on this point.

(6) FE MA also does not provide for more stringent punishment for 
a second or every subsequent offence. Under FERA, in such  cases, 
the court could sentence the person convicted to imprisonment for 
a term not loss than six months and not more than seven years and 
with fine.

(7)  FERA  had a salutary inbuilt protection against  any  person 
giving  false  report leading to search,  and  investigation  and 
against an enforcement officer misusing his powers, as follows:

(a) Any person, wilfully or maliciously giving false  information 
leading  to  vexatious  starch and  arrest,  is  punishable  with 
maximum  imprisonment  of two years or with fine  (a  paltry  Rs. 
2,000!) or with both;

(b)  Any Enforcement Officer is liable to a maximum fine  of  Rs. 
2,000 (he has been let off rather easily!) if he causes search to 
be  made without ground of suspicion or `vexatiously' detains  or 
searches or arrests any person;

(c) Any Enforcement Officer is liable to be imprisoned for a term 
which  may extend to six months or with fine which may extend  to 
Rs.  1,000  or both if he discloses any document  or  information 
obtained  by  him except `in the discharge of his  duty  in  good 
faith'.

It  is  a  pity that FEMA does not have  these  `very  necessary' 
provisions.

Repeal of FERA

Although  FEMA provides for the repeal of FERA it  also  provides 
that offences committed under the repealed Act shall continue  to 
be  governed by the provisions of the repealed Act as if  it  had 
not  been  repealed. In the words of Mr. R. A.  Shah,  a  leading 
solicitor  of  Mumbai,  ``In  terms of Clause  49  of  FEMA,  the 
provisions  of FERA will remain perpetually in the statute  books 
despite  FERA  being repealed" (Chartered  Secretary  -  December 
1998).
