
Should black money be wished away?


By S. Swaminathan

Some   western   commentators   on  the   Indian   economy   have 
characterised it as one of the most under-performing economies in 
the world. A far truer description could be that it is an economy 
with  large  segments  of activity lying outside  the  system  of 
taxation.  Even after fifty years of  organised  self-government, 
India  has one of the lowest rates of aggregate tax revenues,  in 
terms of the GDP. For the Union Government, the tax/GDP ratio  in 
recent years has been slippery around 9 per cent.

With  the growing range of economic activities, especially  after 
1991, and with the emergence of a fairly active services  sector, 
the  question  of  resource mobilisation  through  taxation,  has 
evidently assumed critical importance. 

Almost all the budgets of the Union Government since 1991-92 have 
suffered  from the twin perils of high levels of fiscal  deficits 
and  ballooning  public  debt. From Dr.  Manmohan  Singh  to  Mr. 
Yashwant  Sinha,  the  predicament of the  Finance  Minister  has 
virtually  remained  intractable  in so far  as  efforts  towards 
expenditure  containment have proved as elusive as  those  feebly 
mooted for additional resources mobilisation. 

The dogged declarations about fiscal correction  notwithstanding, 
the  task  of reining in the fiscal deficit has continued  to  be 
almost insuperable.

Disinvestment - a mirage?

Over the nine years since 1991 the possibilities of stopping  the 
needless  diversion  of budgetary resources  towards  loss-making 
public  enterprises  and  those  of  raising  resources   through 
disinvestment  of Government equity have hardly availed owing  to 
the  dominant  mindset in the political system which  refuses  to 
come to terms with the inexorable need to disband enterprises  in 
the  public  sector which have become  technologically  obsolete, 
economically unsustainable and financially bankrupt. 

Despite    a    Disinvestment    Commission    making    detailed 
recommendations   case-by-case   for  dealing  with   58   public 
enterprises  of the Centre, the spectacle of budgetary  resources 
being  spent  on  paying wages for workers  for  abstinence  from 
production,   goes  on  thanks  to  a  perversion  of   political 
consensus. 

The  belief  that disinvestment itself can  generate  substantial 
financial  resources for the Government for use in  restructuring 
viable  public  enterprises and for deployment  in  the  critical 
infrastructure and social sectors, is fast becoming  hypothetical 
what with the disappointing record in disinvestment.  

With all the new capacities built up in different industries over 
the last nine years, it is indeed doubtful whether there will  be 
any  takers  for  the  sick public  enterprises  from  among  the 
domestic entrepreneurs or foreign investors.

Revenue buoyancy

That the Government can hope to garner increased tax revenue as a 
consequence of higher rates of GDP growth of 7-8 per cent in  the 
medium term, is a prospect which ought to bring some cheer to the 
policymakers, granted that expenditure control will not remain as 
pathetically inefficient as it has been over the years. 

Such  an  expectation  would  however  hinge  on  another   vital 
requisite,  namely, that tax administration and enforcement  will 
themselves  improve  substantially apart from the tax  net  being 
enlarged to cover hitherto untaxed incomes as in agriculture, the 
unorganised sector and in professional services.

The underground economy

Despite many amnesty schemes in the past, unaccounted money  (the 
parallel  economy) continues to be a major challenge. The  latest 
among such schemes (leaving out the largely infructuous Kar Vivad 
Samadhan  scheme) was the Voluntary Disclosure of  Income  Scheme 
(VDIS) which Mr. Chidambaram so zealously pursued in 1997-98. 

That  scheme netted around Rs. 8,000 crores on a declared  income 
of  around  of  Rs.  30,000  crores. There  has  been  a  lot  of 
moralising  against  such  schemes but  what  cannot  be  totally 
overlooked is that no Government can remain apathetic to the fact 
that  owing  to  a  complexity  of  socio-political  and  ethical 
failures, the generation of black money and the financing of many 
enterprises  in  the economy through tainted money, have  been  a 
disconcertingly enduring phenomenon. 

The  fact  is that black money is both a stock and a flow.  As  a 
stock,  much  of  it  perhaps is  embodied  in  real  estate  and 
jewellery besides ``gold biscuits''. But this apart, black  money 
is a perennial flow in an economy where corruption flourishes. 

It  is  no  new thesis that tax evasion  is  pervasive  in  India 
whether  it relates to income-tax, excise duty, customs  duty  or 
commercial  taxes. That a large part of the flow of  black  money 
finances  trade in commodities as well as consumer durables is  a 
known fact. 

The  question then is whether the Government should seek  to  tap 
such  black  money  for  developmental  activities  or  assume  a 
``holier  than  thou''  approach in  refusing  to  recognise  the 
phenomenon  at all. The new Money Laundering Law proposed can  be 
expected  to deter people from acquiring  money/property  through 
unlawful means but it cannot eliminate the evil of black money. 

What  should  a  pragmatic  Government do in  the  face  of  this 
continuing  menace in the economy? Those who  advocate  stringent 
action including confiscation of property on a charge-sheet being 
filed against an accused party are perhaps not reckoning with the 
new forms of corruption which such an approach may breed. 

A more constructive approach, perhaps, could be to channel  black 
money into productive investments in the economy and particularly 
in  infrastructure  and  housing. If such an  approach  can  also 
benefit  the capital market by enlarging the funds  available  to 
it, so much the better. 

There  are  ways  in  which  corporate  enterprises  engaged   in 
infrastructure development, real estate promotion, house building 
and in the development of townships, satellite towns etc., can be 
encouraged  to  access  black  money  through  bonds  and  equity 
(brought under an amnesty scheme).

Of course, the criticism against the Government for what would be 
called ``compounding with the evil of black money'' would have to 
be  faced. Moral obloquy would not matter so long as  the  larger 
social  benefits  of an upgraded infrastructure and  an  expanded 
stock of housing facilities can be ensured through such a scheme. 

The traditional bias against such a proposal comes from the moral 
sensitivity  (hypocrisy?)  about the Government  surrendering  to 
evil  forces  in the society. This attitude has  an  ostrich-like 
quality  of  wanton  refusal  to  recognise  the  fact  that  tax 
compliance can never be universal even in an ideal society. 

No  Government which looks at social and economic development  of 
the   people   in  terms  of  maximisation   of   investment   in 
infrastructure and in basic amenities can afford to turn a  blind 
eye to black money.
