
Tax benefits of investing in MFs


Mutual  fund investment offers an attractive opportunity  to  the 
investor  in terms of capital appreciation, liquidity as well  as 
tax benefits.

TAX benefits play a critical role in the investment decisions  of 
the  mutual fund investor. In India, the Government also  appears 
to  be  keen to encourage investment in mutual funds.  This  will 
encourage  investors  from seeking the intermediation  of  mutual 
funds  in  the capital and debt markets, thus  bringing  in  more 
funds  for industry and commerce. Perhaps the Government is  also 
of the opinion that it will be more difficult for the wrong  kind 
of   companies  to  raise  money  from  gullible   investors   if 
professional  investors  like mutual funds are  involved  in  the 
investment process.

The tax benefits for investing in mutual funds are as follows:

*  Under  Sec. 10(23D) of the Income-tax Act, a  mutual  fund  is 
completely exempt from paying taxes on dividends/interest/capital 
gains  earned by it. Even though this is a direct benefit to  the 
fund, the unit holders obviously gain as well.

* Twenty per cent of the amount invested in specified tax savings 
schemes of mutual funds (called equity linked savings schemes  or 
ELSS)  is  deductible from the tax payable by the investor  in  a 
particular  year subject to a maximum of Rs. 2,000 per  investor. 
This benefit is available under Sec. 88 of the Income-tax Act.

The  1999  budget has made the mutual fund investor  exempt  from 
paying  any tax on the dividend received by him from  the  mutual 
fund,  irrespective of the type of mutual fund. This  benefit  is 
available  under Sec. 10(33) of the IT Act. Since investors  will 
be receiving tax-free dividends, the benefits of Sec. 80L are  no 
longer relevant for mutual funds.

A mutual fund has to pay a withholding tax of 10 per cent on  the 
dividends  distributed by it under the revised provisions of  the 
1T  Act.  In fact, the actual tax will be 11 per cent  since  the 
mutual fund must pay a 10 per cent surcharge as well. However, if 
a  mutual fund has invested more than 50 per cent of  its  assets 
into equity shares, then it is exempt from paying any tax on  the 
dividend  distributed  by  it, for the  next  three  years.  This 
benefit will give a boost to equity based and balanced funds.  On 
the  other  hand  investors will do well to opt  for  the  growth 
option in the case of debt based funds. 

A  few funds have introduced an innovative systematic  withdrawal 
plan  wherein  investors can leave standing instructions  to  the 
fund  to redeem a fixed amount every month, to get over  the  tax 
problem.  The  dividend tax on mutual funds is  advantageous  for 
investors who otherwise are in the 22 per cent or 33 per cent tax  
brackets,  but unfair to those who are in the zero  tax  bracket. 
Those in the nil tax bracket will have to pay by default a 11 per 
cent  tax  from dividend income distributed by mutual  funds.  It 
must also be remembered that this dividend tax is not like a  tax 
deducted  at source (TDS). Unlike TDS, an assessee  cannot  claim 
refund  from IT authorities under the dividend tax.Investment  in 
eligible securities of the entire proceeds obtained from the sale 
of  capital  assets  for three years or investment  of  only  the 
profits  for  seven years, exempts the asset holder  from  paying 
capital gains tax. This benefit is available under Sec. 54EA  and 
54EB of the IT Act.

The  units of mutual funds are treated as capital assets and  the 
investor  has  to pay capital gains tax on the sale  proceeds  of 
mutual fund units sold by him. For investments held for less than 
one year the tax is equal to 30 per cent of the capital gain plus 
surcharge.  For investments held for more than one year, the  tax 
is equal to 20 per cent of the capital gains plus surcharge.  The 
investor  is  entitled  to  indexation  benefit  while  computing 
capital gains tax. 

Thus if a typical growth scheme of an income fund shows a rise of 
12  per cent in the net asset value (NAV) after one year and  the 
investor  sells it, he will pay a 20 per cent tax on the  selling 
price  less  cost price inclusive of indexation  component.  This 
reduces  the  incidence of tax considerably. This  concession  is 
available under Sec. 48 of the IT Act.

In order to understand the benefit of the concept of  indexation, 
let us assume that an investor has invested 1000 units at an  NAV 
of Rs. 10 per unit, that is, he has invested Rs. 10,000. The  NAV 
grows  at, say, 12 per cent during the next 12 months  and  after 
one year the NAV is Rs. 11.2 per unit. The value of the  original 
investment  has now become Rs. 11,200. The gain for the  investor 
is  Rs.  1,200. If we presume an indexation component  of  7  per 
cent, then the indexed cost of the original Rs. 10,000 investment 
is  Rs.  10,700 after one year. Thus the capital  gains  will  be 
Rs.(11,200  minus 10,700) = Rs. 500. The long term capital  gains 
tax being 22 per cent would lead to the investor paying a capital 
gains  tax  of Rs. 500 at 22 per cent, that is, Rs.  110.  A  tax 
amount  of Rs. 110 on a total gain of Rs. 1,200 means a tax  rate 
of 9.16 per cent irrespective of the tax bracket of the investor. 
This  tax  may  also be avoided by either  investing  the  entire 
amount of the realised value, that is, Rs. 11,200 for three years 
in  eligible  securities  under Sec. 54EA or  the  capital  gains 
amount  of Rs. 500 in eligible securities for seven  years  under 
Sec. 54EB.

The above tax benefits make it clear that mutual fund  investment 
today  offers  a very attractive investment  opportunity  to  the 
investor  in terms of capital appreciation, liquidity as well  as 
tax benefits. The investor has only to identify the right type of 
mutual fund in which he can repose faith.

Abhijit Roy 
