
PM announces Rs.10,271-cr. package for North-East


By Our Special Correspondent

SHILLONG, JAN. 22. The Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari  Vajpayee, 
announced here today a Rs. 10,271-crore ``Agenda for the Economic 
Development''  for the North-East and Sikkim, implying  that  two 
earlier  packages  - of Rs. 6,100 crores and Rs. 7,000  crores  - 
announced by two former Prime Ministers, Mr. H. D. Deve Gowda and 
Mr. I. K. Gujral, have been given the go-by.

Later,  answering  questions  at a press conference  at  the  Raj 
Bhavan  here,  Mr. Vajpayee explained that some of  the  projects 
included  in  the new package would be financed out of  the  plan 
allocation,  while funds for some others would be made  available 
from outside the Tenth Plan.

However, a close scrutiny of the new package reveals that some of 
the schemes - like fencing and construction of roads on the Indo- 
Bangladesh border - are ongoing projects while some others,  like 
Rs.  500 crores from the non-lapsable pool of the Centre for  the 
North-East are actually transfers from one head to another.

Mr. Vajpayee also said that some projects in the new scheme  were 
time-bound  while  others were not but efforts would be  made  to 
complete them ``in the shortest possible time''.

He  said the North-East Council (NEC) would be the  nodal  agency 
for  implementing the schemes. A Bill will be introduced  in  the 
next session of Parliament to vest more powers to the NEC.

However,  monitoring the progress of work on  different  projects 
will  be done by the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) as  the  Prime 
Minister  himself  will oversee development  and  anti-insurgency 
exercises in the North-East.

The Home Minister, Mr. L. K. Advani, who was also present at  the 
press meet, declined to name any militant outfit as being used by 
the   ISI  of  Pakistan.  ``We  have  information  that   several 
underground outfits are getting funds and arms from Pakistan  and 
have even gone to Pakistan, but I will not name them,'' he said.

The Prime Minister's public meeting at the Polo Grounds here this 
afternoon was rather a poor show by the ruling combine of UDP and 
BJP,  as  only about five thousand people turned up to  hear  Mr. 
Vajpayee.

PTI reports:

On security-related expenditure (SRE), the Prime Minister assured 
that  the  Centre  would  further expand the  list  of  items  of 
expenditure incurred by the police eligible for reimbursement. It 
would include 50 per cent cost of petrol, oil and lubricants,  he  
said  and  added village guards, village defence  committees  and 
houseguards would be extended to Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh.

He  said  the  scheme  to modernise the  police  force  would  be 
extended  to Sikkim and the total additional reimbursement  would 
be Rs. 40 crores per year.

Mr. Vajpayee said the Government would also sanction three Indian 
Reserve  Battalions  (IRBs), one each for  Tripura,  Mizoram  and 
Manipur.  With an estimated annual expense of Rs. 15  crores  for 
three  years,  setting up of these battalions would cost  Rs.  45 
crores, he said.

The Prime Minister ruled out any negotiations on the question  of 
sovereignty   but  said  the  Government  would  enter   into   a 
``meaningful  dialogue'' with the National Socialist  Council  of 
Nagaland (NSCN). ``There is no question of any negotiation on the 
question of sovereignty.'' 

Mr.  Vajpayee  said it has been decided to  fence  the  remaining 
portion of the Indo-Bangladesh border and construct border  roads 
with a total outlay of Rs. 1,335 crores. The work is to  commence 
in April.

A  Central  University would be set up in Mizoram and a  Bill  in 
this regard has been passed by Rajya Sabha and would be taken  up 
shortly in Lok Sabha.
