
Karmapa not to be allowed into Sikkim 


By Harish Khare

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 22. The Vajpayee Government is believed to  have 
taken  the first step towards finalising a policy on the  Karmapa 
issue. According to senior sources in the Vajpayee Government, it 
had been decided that the 14-year old Ugyen Trinley Dorje, who is 
the 17th Kagyu Karmapa, would not be allowed to enter Sikkim.

It  is not known whether the Karmapa had made any formal  request 
to  be allowed to go to Sikkim but the Government's decision  not 
to  let  him travel to the Rumtek monastery is part of  a  larger 
decision  to deal with the issue without generating any  tensions 
in the relationship with China. 

Sikkim's  Rumtek monastery is the headquarters of the Kagyu  sect 
and houses the legendary ``black hat''. The monastery is also the 
base  for Shamar Rinpoche, an anti-China voice; the Rumtek  group 
does  not recognise Trinley Dorje as the 17th  Karmapa.  Instead, 
Shamar Rinpoche has propped up a different Karmapa, Thaye Dorje. 

Since  1994,  the  supporters of the two Karmapas  have  been  at 
loggerheads. By denying Trinley Dorje permission to go to Sikkim, 
the Indian Government has for now ensured that it was not seen as 
encouraging a power struggle at Rumtek.

The  decision  not to let Trinley Dorje travel to Sikkim  is  the 
minimum  agreement that has emerged from within  the  Government. 
The  Defence  Minister, Mr. George Fernandes, has  publicly  said 
that Trinley Dorje could stay in India without in any way hurting 
India-China   relations.  This  statement  has  not   been   much 
appreciated in the collective counsel at the highest level.

The  Vajpayee Government is yet to figure out what the affair  is 
all  about. For now, there seems to be an agreement  between  New 
Delhi  and Beijing that both the sides would approach  the  issue 
unhurriedly,  would  be  in  regular  touch  and  would  seek  to 
accommodate each other's concerns. 

The  understanding  means  that both  sides  would  pretend  that 
Beijing was as much surprised as New Delhi at the arrival of  the 
young Karmapa in India; this assessment presumably does not admit 
to  the  ``Chinese ploy'' theory, which makes it easier  for  the 
Government  to  take a less hurried attitude. It  also  means  no 
immediate asylum for the Karmapa, even if he makes a request  for 
it.  Nor for that matter is there a clear assessment as  to  what 
the American stand, if any, is in the matter.
