
Kargil war heroes honoured


NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 22. They saw death and destruction  from  close 
quarters together and in fact, participated in the killing  spree 
which claimed 24 lives. 

Today,  they  were  the centre of media  attraction,  with  their 
chests standing out and heads held high with pride.

Beaming  at  the attention, Paramvir  Chakra  Awardee,  Grenadier 
Yogendra  Singh Yadav and his company Commander,  Mahavir  Chakra 
Awardee, Captain Balwan Singh, who played a key role in capturing 
Tiger  Hill  in  Drass subsector of Kargil  in  early  July,  are 
humility-personified.

So  is Rifleman, Mr. Sanjay Kumar of 13 Jammu and  Kashmir  (JAK) 
Rifles, the other PVC Awardee who came back alive from the Kargil 
war after a brilliant operation on point 4875. ``We just did  our 
job,'' they say, when asked how they feel.

The three soldiers, as also Major Sonam Wangchuk (MVC) of  Ladakh 
Scouts  and the parents of late Captain Manoj Kumar Pandey  (PVC) 
of  1/11  Gorkha Rifles were present at a press briefing  on  the 
Army contingent at the Republic Day parade this year.

Gdr. Yadav, who is recovering from 15 bullet wounds and still has 
his hand in a sling, feels he has fulfilled a promise he made  to 
his father. 

As  a  child, he was enthralled by the tales of wars  his  father 
fought and always wanted to be a soldier and go to war. 

That  he would earn the country's highest gallantry award in  the 
process was something he had perhaps not even dreamt of. But now, 
Gdr.  Yadav  has  a dream to fulfil: to get  commissioned  as  an 
officer. 

The father of Capt. Pandey, Mr. Gopichand, says he and his family 
are still trying to come to terms with the tragedy. 

Losing their son, a promising sportsman and upcoming officer  but 
above  all a ``wonderful human being,'' would be quite  difficult 
for  the Pandeys, but they are happy that both the Army  and  the 
Government have taken very good care of them. 

``One  phone  call and they come. I have not had to  worry  about 
anything,'' Mr. Gopichand Pandey says. 

Rfn.  Sanjay  Kumar  has got engaged and  is  excited  about  his 
marriage, scheduled for April. He too wants to become an  officer 
through the Army Cadet College (ACC) entry scheme. 

Captain  Balwan,  a  `kid' who had barely seen  three  months  of  
service when he fought in Kargil, wants to ``wait for  sometime'' 
before  he  ties  the knot. But proposals  have  already  started 
pouring in, he says, blushing. 

But  for  the moment, their attention is on  the  parade,  during 
which  the President will pin the medals on the two PVC  awardees 
and present the medals of their sons to parents of Captains Manoj 
Kumar Pandey and Vikram Batra of 13 JAK. 

- PTI 
