
Port workers call off strike 


NEW  DELHI,  JAN.22.  The five-day old strike by  port  and  dock 
workers  at  11  major ports in the country  was  called  off  on 
Saturday  night,  following a written assurance  by  the  Surface 
Transport  Minister,  Mr. Rajnath Singh, to settle  pending  wage 
related issues, trade union leaders said. 

The  strike had been withdrawn with immediate effect, Mr.  S.  R. 
Kulkarni,  president, All India Port and Dock Workers  Federation 
told presspersons after a marathon meeting.

Mr.  Rajnath  Singh said he had assured the  unions  to  consider 
their demands `sympathetically.' Mr.  Singh also assured that the 
contentious  demands  of the unions for retaining  wage  revision 
period  at five years and giving arrears on house rent  allowance 
(HRA)  from  January  one,  1998,  would  be  taken  up  at   the 
`appropriate level' before March 31.

Regarding  house rent allowance, the workers can either  opt  for 
the existing rates arrived at the last wage settlement or the new 
rates announced by the Government, Mr. Kulkarni said.

If  the  existing  rate of HRA was chosen,  the  maximum  ceiling 
limits  would be raised to Rs. 2400, Rs. 2000, Rs. 1500  and  Rs. 
1000 in place of present ceiling of Rs. 1200, Rs. 1000,
Rs. 600 and Rs. 400.

At  present,  the HRA rate for Mumbai and Jawaharlal  Nehru  Port 
Trust's  have  been fixed at 30 per cent of basic pay  while  for 
Chennai  and Calcutta ports have 25 per cent,  Visakhapatnam  and 
Cochin (17.5 Per cent), Kandla, Mangalore, Tuticorin and Goa  (15 
per cent), and Paradip and Haldia (10 per cent).

On  the  other hand, the Government has offered port  workers  of 
Mumbai, JNPT, Chennai, Calcutta a HRA of 30 per cent without  any 
ceiling while Visakhapatnam and Cochin ports have been offered 15 
per cent without ceiling. 

For all other major ports, the HRA would be ten per cent  without 
ceiling.

Earlier in the day, port operations continued to be suspended  in 
the Calcutta Port and Haldia Dock System on the fifth day of  the 
all-India port and dock workers' strike  today, even as the  port 
authorities claimed normal work at the jetties in the riverpoint.

The Calcutta Port Trust (CPT) sources said that five of the seven 
ships  berthed  at  the  riverpoint  jetties  at  Sagar,  Diamond 
Harbour,  Sandheads  and Kulpi, unloaded cargo  during  the  day. 
However, normal loading and unloading operations remained totally 
stalled  in  the Calcutta dock system where 10 ships  were  still 
berthed. 

Lock gate and tug operations in the Calcutta Port and Haldia Dock 
System  were  being  maintained by the navy  personnel,  the  CPT 
sources said.

One oil tanker discharged 4,500 tonnes of high speed diesel (HSD) 
at the Budge oil terminal and sailed out, the sources said.

Picketing by striking workers continued in front of the  Calcutta 
Port  and  Haldia  Dock  System, but  no  untoward  incident  was 
reported.

In  a significant move, the Murmogoa Port Trust moved the  Panjim 
Bench  of  Bombay High Court yesterday, seeking  to  declare  the 
strike illegal, official sources said. 

- PTI, UNI
