
25 Pak. soldiers killed near LoC 


By Shujaat Bukhari

SRINAGAR,  JAN. 22. At least 25 Pakistani soldiers, including  an 
officer,  were killed near Raipore in the Akhnoor sector  of  the 
Jammu division early this morning, when Indian troops repulsed an 
attack launched by them on a post in the Chamb area. Four  Indian 
soldiers were injured during the attack on the post, `PP 13'. 

The  Pakistani forces reportedly used heavy mortars,  medium  and 
heavy machine guns, recoil-less guns and rocket launchers.

According to Brig. Randhir Sinh, Brigadier General Staff (BGS) of 
the  Nagrota-based  16 Corps, about 30 soldiers of  the  Pakistan 
Army  launched  an attack on the Nodiyal post in the  Chamb  area 
along the Line of Control (LoC) at around 5 a.m. They resorted to 
heavy  firing and crossed the LoC, he told The Hindu.  ``However, 
they were beaten back.''

Retaliatory  firing pushed them further away, even as the  bodies 
of  five  Pakistani soldiers, including a Lieutenant  of  the  24 
Balouch  Regiment,  were recovered, he said. In  the  retaliatory 
attack,  a  two-storeyed  bunker  was damaged  and  at  least  12 
Pakistani  soldiers  were killed. The number could,  however,  be 
more, Brig. Sinh said. 

``Our  men saw them dragging bodies out of the damaged  bunker,'' 
he said. Other sources put the number at 25.

About  casualties  on the Indian side during the two-  hour  long 
operation,  the  BGS  said four soldiers  were  injured  and  the 
condition of two was serious. About the disposal of the Pakistani 
soldiers'  bodies, he said this matter would be taken up  at  the 
Director-General of Military Operations (DGMO) level. 

``If  there  is  no response from Pakistan, we  will  go  for  an 
Islamic burial,'' Brig. Sinh said. 

Arms recovered

In  Jammu, with few days left for the Republic Day  celebrations, 
panic  gripped the Civil Lines area today when  police  recovered 
two  AK-47  rifles  and grenades left  behind  by  two  militants 
travelling in an autorickshaw. 

Police sources said two militants wearing combat dress boarded an 
autorickshaw from Talab Khatikhan and reached the railway station 
from  where they moved back. The driver, noticing the  suspicious 
movements  of the two, informed a police patrol. However,  before 
the police could act, the militants managed to escape.

Security in the city has been further beefed up.  
