
Goh for Asian free trade zone 


By V. Jayanth

CHENNAI,  JAN.  22. Asia must think of a ``free trade  area''  to 
avoid being marginalised because of the goings on in other  parts 
of  the world, the Singapore Prime Minister, Mr. Goh  Chok  Tong, 
said today.

In  an interview to The Hindu at the end of his six-day visit  to 
India, Mr. Goh said, ``It was your Finance Minister's idea and my 
argument was that the WTO free trade regime was preferable. Since 
another round of negotiations is not about to begin and since the 
West   has  its  own  free  trade  arrangements,  Asia   may   be 
marginalised.''

He  said  that the North American Free Trade Area  (NAFTA)  could 
expand to cover the Americas and that the European Community  was 
expanding to include other countries. So an Asian Free Trade Area 
would be a good idea. ``I think it is for the long term. I see no 
harm in getting some economists and academics to study this idea. 
If  the benefits are obvious, then I think we must consider  this 
seriously.''

The Prime Minister said there was a ``lapse of attention'' in the 
interaction  between India and the ASEAN. ``We  were  preoccupied 
with  the financial crisis and India was not too deeply  affected 
by it. Now that the crisis is over, I think both sides must begin 
to  nurture our cordial relations and turn it to  something  much 
stronger.''   Mr.  Goh,  who visited India after a  gap  of  five 
years,  said  that  during  his earlier  visit,  only  the  Prime 
Minister,  Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao, and the Finance Minister,  Dr. 
Manmohan Singh, were talking about reforms. But now, there was  a 
wider  consensus.  One major change now was that the  States  and 
their  Chief  Ministers were pro-active and there was  a  healthy 
competition to attract foreign investments. ``They must work  for 
a  pro-  investment  climate for foreign  investors  and  we  are 
certainly keen on tapping Indian potential.''

If  India  pushed ahead with the second  generation  reforms  and 
opened  up  its economy, besides increasing its  trade  with  the 
ASEAN,  the time would come to invite India to a summit of  ASEAN 
leaders, Mr. Goh said.

Making  it  clear it was his view, the Prime Minister  said,  ``I 
have to test this out on my colleagues in the ASEAN. We have this 
regular  dialogue with the East Asian countries of  Japan,  South 
Korea and China because of the economic benefits. If India  opens 
up and there is a increase in trade between India and the  ASEAN, 
I  think a dialogue is called for at our regular summits. At  the 
right time, I think there is a place for India at the ASEAN-plus-
Asian countries dialogue.''
