
Policy on aerospace must: Kalam 


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  22.  The Principal Scientific  Advisor  to  the 
Government,  Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, has stressed the need for  a 
national policy on aerospace technology, involving all the public 
and private sector agencies dealing with aerospace systems.

Addressing  the 51st annual general meeting of  the  Aeronautical 
Society  of  India  (ASI) here today, Dr. Kalam  said  India  had 
unlimited potential for pushing forward aerospace technology  and 
``we  should  not  miss  the  bus  now''.  The  country  has  the 
capabilities  of becoming the leader in designing  the  aerospace 
systems. 

A  national  aeronautical policy must be evolved looking  at  the 
technology  in  an integrated way and involving the  Ministry  of 
Civil Aviation, Research and Development, and other  aeronautical 
institutes in the private and public sector, he said.

Dr.  Kalam said India was in a position to send  unmanned  aerial 
vehicles (UAV) into the required area which can do reconnaissance 
and come back to the base station. In the next five years,  these 
UAVs would become supersonic. And by 2010, the UAVs would replace 
most  of the fighter aircraft. Similarly, the country could  ill-
afford  to  miss the opportunity now available for  building  the 
120-seater passenger aircraft as it cannot depend permanently  on 
the import of the aircraft.

Explaining  the areas of core competence built by India, he  said 
the  aircraft technology, missile technology, launch  vehicle  or 
satellite  technology  and  maintenance  science  or  maintenance 
technology were important.

Prof.  P.  Rama  Rao, Vice-Chancellor,  University  of  Hyderabad 
presided.  Air Marshal Raj Kumar, who took over as the  president 
of ASI, said the society has instituted two awards from this year 
-  Dr.  Kalam's award for the best paper present  at  the  annual 
general  meeting  and  Prof. Pandali  best  student  scholarship. 
Mr.R.N. Agarwal, Chairman, of Hyderabad chapter welcomed.
