
EC's order, a blessing in disguise for Samata


By K. Balchand

PATNA,  JAN. 22. The Samata Party today asserted its  stature  to 
the Janata Dal (U) in the tussle between the two for supremacy in 
the  Gangetic plains of north and central Bihar,  which  accounts 
for two-thirds of seats in the Bihar Assembly.

The  Election Commission's order was a blessing in  disguise  for 
the  Samata Party as it had been trying to free itself  from  the 
JD(J) ever since the Lok Sabha elections.

The Samata Party has been nervous over the merger moves, which it 
had  agreed to under pressure, as it had dwarfed its status as  a 
major  political  party  and prevented it from  emerging  as  the 
alternative to the ruling RJD in the State.

That  is precisely why the Samata Party had insisted that if  the 
two  parties  were supposed to contest as a  single  entity  then 
Assembly elections should be contested under its symbol and  that 
the  Defence  Minister,  Mr. George Fernandes, be  made  the  new 
president.  It was not amusing at all that the JD(U) turned  both 
the proposals down as that would prove suicidal for it.

This  tug of war, of course, was complicated by the race for  the 
post  of Chief Minister between the Communication  Minister,  Mr. 
Ram  Vilas Paswan, and the Agriculture Minister, and  Mr.  Nitish 
Kumar,  in  case the NDA wrested power from the RJD.  The  Samata 
Party's  separation  from the JD(U) was hastened  by  the  coming 
together  of  some  leaders of the JD(U) with  the  former  Union 
Minister,  Mr.  Rama Krishna Hegde, which had made things  a  bit 
uneasy for Mr. Fernandes.

And  that gave room to the rumour that some of the  Samata  Party 
MPs  had shifted their loyalty to the JD(U).  Yesterday's  action 
helped the Samata Party, put the record straight that all its  12 
MPs, except one were united in maintaining a separate identity.

The party leadership, thereby seeks by underplay the role of  the 
JD(U)'s  contribution in the Lok Sabha elections and claimed  for 
itself  a  larger  canvas  of  the  anti-Laloo  votes.  This   is 
especially important considering that these two parties would  be 
contesting most of the seats in Bihar against the RJD.

If  negotiations  within  the NDA over seat  adjustments  are  an 
indication,   the   BJP   would  be   contesting   160   to   170 
constituencies. The Bihar Assembly is a 324-member House.

The point is that the BJP would be contesting no less than 70  of 
the 82 seats in South Bihar and would not be contesting more than 
90  seats in the plains which account for 242 seats.  That  means 
that it would be contesting just above one third of the seats  in  
North and Central Bihar.

It  is  against  this backdrop the claims of the  JD(U)  and  the 
Samata  Party  needs  to  be  understood.  The  Samata  Party  is 
demanding  130  seats, while the JD(U) is  insisting  on  parity. 
Apart  from  seeking equality, the JD(U),  more  importantly,  is 
aiming at sufficiently checking the rise of the Samata Party.

On  the other hand the Samata Party is demanding a greater  share 
of  the cake. Should it even succeed in cornering 100  seats  for 
itself,  it  would  emerge  as the elder  party  in  the  region, 
elbowing out the BJP in the process.

Whether  the BJP is behind the JD(U)'s demand to keep the  Samata 
Party  at bay only time will tell. And whether the  Samata  Party 
yields to that pressure is anybody's guess.
