
'HC committed grave error in TANSI case' 


By Our Legal Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 22. The Special Leave Petition filed by the Tamil 
Nadu Government against the Madras High Court ruling in the TANSI 
case  contended that the HC ought to have held that  the  offence 
under  Sec. 169 IPC (public servant unlawfully buying or  bidding 
for  property) was made out as the respondent  (Ms.  Jayalalitha, 
who  was the Chief Minister then) was prohibited by the  Code  of 
Conduct for Ministers framed through a G.O. on May 28, 1969. 

The  HC had committed a ``grave error'' in holding that  the  bar 
under the Code could not operate as statutory provisions  against 
the respondent and in such circumstances, it could not be legally 
presumed  that there were sufficient materials to  frame  charges 
against  her. The court was wrong in holding that any  breach  of 
the  Code  imposed  on a public servant would not  amount  to  an 
offence under Sec. 169 IPC as the Code was not a statute.

The  SLP  said  the  HC had failed to  note  that  the  Code  for 
Ministers  exercising  powers  under  Article  166  (Conduct   of 
business  of the Government of a State) of the Constitution  read 
with  Articles 154 and 162 (dealing with Executive Power and  its 
extent)  was  a  law within the meaning of  Article  13  (3)  and 
legally binding and enforceable in law. 

The SLP said that the HC ought to have found that the respondent, 
along  with  others,  had conspired to cheat  the  Government  by 
undervaluing  the property and causing wrongful loss to the  tune 
of  Rs.  3.07 crores, including loss on stamp duty.  The  HC  had 
erred  in holding that the purchase of the property was  effected 
though  an  auction when the facts would show that the  sale  was 
made through tenders. 

The  SLP  pleaded  that  serious  questions  of  law  had  to  be 
determined  by  the apex court, namely whether the Code  did  not 
bear  the  teeth  of a statute and  it  was  merely  departmental 
instructions which were neither law within the meaning of Article 
13  (laws inconsistent with or in derogation of  the  fundamental 
rights) nor it was a ``procedure established by law'' within  the 
meaning of Article 21 (protection or life and personal  liberty); 
whether  any  breach of the Code by a public  servant  would  not 
amount to an offence under Sec. 169 IPC.

The  SLP  further said that it was also to be determined  by  the 
apex court whether the HC was right in discharging the respondent 
when  the prosecution evidence had almost been  completed  before 
the  trial court; whether the sale of Government land  for  value 
less than the guideline rates and collection of stamp duty  lower 
than  the recommended guideline value would not attract  offences 
of  cheating and misappropriation and whether there could not  be 
any charge framed for offence under Sec. 409 IPC (criminal breach  
of trust by public servant) in respect of an immovable property.

The  SLP  added that it was to be determined  whether  the  Chief 
Minister of a State, who had to approve any transaction over  and 
above Rs. 1 crore in view of the G.O., could not be said to  have 
control or governance over the ``Government property'' which  was 
sold for a sale price over and above Rs. 1 crore.

The SLP, which prayed for setting aside the HC judgment and  stay 
of  its  operation, is expected to come up for admission  in  the 
next  few days. The Tamil Nadu Government is also likely to  file 
another  SLP next week challenging the judgment of the Madras  HC 
upholding  the  trial court's order discharging  Ms.  Jayalalitha 
from the ``coal import case''.
