
SC upholds Madras HC ruling on election petition


By T. Padmanabha Rao

NEW DELHI, JAN. 22. The Supreme Court has affirmed a Madras  High 
Court  ruling dismissing in limine an election  petition  against 
Mr.  C. P. Thirunavukkarusu (DMK) who was returned to  the  Rajya 
Sabha in October 1997 from the Union Territory of Pondicherry.

The  petition  was filed by Mr. V. Narayanaswamy, (Cong.)  -  the 
unsuccessful candidate - on grounds of alleged corrupt  practices 
in the election. 

Mr.  Justice  D. P. Wadhwa delivering the judgment of  the  Bench 
said  that ``it will be thus seen that the election petition  not 
only  lacked the material facts, it lacked material  particulars, 
defective  verification  and the affidavit filed was not  in  the 
form prescribed.''

Moreover,  the ingredients of `corrupt practices,' as defined  in 
Section 123(1)(B) and 123(2) of the Representation of People  Act 
were also lacking, the Bench observed.

``A  petition levelling a charge of corrupt practice is  required 
by  law  to  be  supported  by  an  affidavit  and  the  election 
petitioner  is obliged to disclose his source of  information  in 
respect  of  the commission of corrupt practice'' and  ``he  must 
state  which  of the allegations are true to  his  knowledge  and 
which  to his belief on information received and believed by  him 
to  be true.'' and ``it is not the form of the affidavit but  its 
substance that matter,'' ``the Bench pointed out. 

To  plead  corrupt practice as contemplated by law it had  to  be 
specifically  alleged that the corrupt practices  were  committed 
with the consent of the candidate and that a particular electoral 
right  of  a person was affected, the Bench said and  added  that 
``it  cannot be left to time, chance or conjecture for the  court 
to draw inference by adopting an involved process or reasoning.'' 

``Where  several  paragraphs of the  election  petition  alleging 
corrupt practices remain unaffirmed under the verification clause 
as  well as the affidavit, the unsworn allegation could  have  no 
legal   existence  and  the  Court  could  not  take   cognisance 
thereof,'' the Bench noted. 

``Charge of corrupt practice being quasi-criminal in nature,  the 
court must always insist on strict compliance with the provisions 
of  law''  the  Bench said and in such a  case  ``it  is  equally 
essential  that the particulars of the charge of allegations  are 
clearly and precisely stated in the petition.'' 

The  Bench,  which included Mr. Justice S.  Rajendra  Babu,  held 
that,  ``the election petition read as a whole did  not  disclose  
any cause of action or triable issue''and therefore, the Petition 
was rightly dismissed by the High Court.
