
Samata's approach delays seat-sharing


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 22. The Samata Party's ``inflexible approach'' to 
the  seat-sharing  problem in Bihar has been  identified  by  all 
other  three would-be partners in the proposed anti-Laloo  Prasad 
front  led by the BJP as the reason for the delay in reaching  an 
understanding,  despite  several rounds of talks at  the  highest 
levels.

Late  tonight,  the  Union Home Minister,  Mr.  L.K.  Advani,  is 
expected make another bid to hammer out an agreement at a meeting 
scheduled  with the top leaders of the Samata Party,  the  Janata 
Dal(United) and the Bihar People's Party, which is headed by  Mr. 
Anand Mohan Singh.

Even  as  the  BJP leaders went on record to  state  that  if  an 
understanding  was  not reached, it would get its  candidates  to 
file  nominations for 85 of the 108 Assembly seats, which  go  to 
the  polls in the first phase and for which nominations close  on 
January 24, the JD(U) declared its intention to contest 32 seats.

The  JD(U) spokesperson, Mr. M. Raghupathy, said that  the  party 
had  identified  32 seats where the BJP had lost its  deposit  or 
fared  very  poorly.  He claimed that his party  had  a  ``strong 
social  base'' in Bihar and could not be ignored. Over  the  last 
few  days,  the JD(U) and the Samata Party have  not  hidden  the 
bitterness that has crept into their relations. Neither is in the 
mood to give in to what was perceived to be the ``unfair demand'' 
of the other.

As  the  BJP  and the JD(U) made their  intentions  clear,  talks 
between  all  the  four parties continued. Last  night,  the  BJP 
general secretary, Mr. K.N. Govindacharya, met the Samata leader, 
Mr.  Nitish  Kumar,  and today the  Samata  president,  Ms.  Jaya 
Jaitely, met the BJP president, Mr. Kushabhau Thakre. 

Ms.  Jaitely  told reporters later that she had conveyed  to  Mr. 
Thakre the need to sort out the problem without any further  loss 
of time.

If  the 1999 Lok Sabha seat-sharing arrangement were to form  the 
basis, the BJP would get 174 Assembly seats, the Samata Party 96, 
the JD(U) 42 and the BPP 12. 

Mr. Govindacharya today made it known that the BJP was willing to 
``sacrifice'' as many as 18 seats (equivalent to three Lok  Sabha 
seats)  but the Samata must also let go of at least six  Assembly 
segments  (equivalent  to one Lok Sabha  constituency).  Eighteen 
more seats could then be given to the JD(U), increasing its share 
of seats to 60, and six more to the BPP, hiking its share to 18.
