
Repayment of rural power loans on States


By Alok Mukherjee

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 22. In a significant policy change, the  Central 
Government  has decided to make States responsible  for  repaying 
Central loans extended for rural electrification programmes.

So far, a portion of the normal Central assistance to States  was 
earmarked  for  rural  electrification under  the  Minimum  Needs 
Programme and released by the Union Finance Ministry as a 100 per 
cent  loan.  This  amount  was  then  passed  on  to  a   Central 
organisation,  the  Rural Electrification Corporation,  which  in 
turn passed it to the State Electricity Boards. Since the REC was 
the  recipient, it had the responsibility of recovering the  loan 
from the SEBs.

The Central Government has now changed this procedure with effect 
from the Annual Plan 2000-2001, beginning on April 1. Henceforth, 
the loan for rural electrification would be released directly  to 
the  State Governments for on-lending to the SEBs.  Consequently, 
the  liability of the repayment would also be the  responsibility 
of the State Governments.

However, the REC's role in supervising the rural  electrification 
programmes  would continue as in the past when SEBs prepared  the 
village electrification schemes which in turn were scrutinised by 
the  REC. Also, the REC would continue to monitor the  programmes 
while the implementation would be done by the concerned SEB.  The 
service charge to be paid by the SEB to the REC would be  decided 
by  the Planning Commission in consultation with the Ministry  of 
Power and the REC.

The  Government also made it clear that budgetary support to  the 
REC  for equity and loans would continue to be made available  as 
was being done at present.

The  significance  of  the  change  in  policy  to  make   States 
responsible for repaying loans is evident from the fact that  the 
outstanding liability of the SEBs to the REC on account of  rural 
electrification  loans  was Rs. 2,316.97 crores as on  March  31, 
1998. However, there was a record recovery of outstandings by the 
REC  during 1998-99, with the result that the  outstandings  came 
down to Rs. 1,729.20 crores by March 31, 1999. It will now be the 
responsibility of the States to clear these dues.
