
CPI, CPI(M-L) reject CPI(M) 'invitation'


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN.22 Differences among Left parties persist on  how 
best  to fight the BJP-led combine in Bihar with the CPI and  the 
CPI(M-L)  today rejecting the CPI(M)'s ``invitation'' to them  to 
join the alliance it has formed with the Rashtriya Janata Dal for 
next month's assembly elections. On the contrary, they wanted the 
CPI(M)  to review its own decision to stay out of  the  ``third'' 
front comprising the CPI, the CPI(M-L), the Forward Bloc, the RSP 
and Mr. Mulayam Singh Yadav's Samajwadi Party. Even as the CPI(M) 
argued  that  Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav's RJD was the  best  bet  to 
check  the  BJP and its allies and that  all  ``secular''  forces 
should  strengthen Mr. Yadav's hands, its other Left allies  were 
of the view that aligning with Mr. Yadav would  help the BJP. 

The CPI pointed out that the BJP grew in Bihar essentially during 
Mr.  Yadav's  regime and in a sense his style of  governance  and 
particularly  his  alleged involvement in the  fodder  scam  were 
responsible for people's alienation from him. ``It was because he 
alienated  people that they turned to the BJP and we don't  think 
that  aligning with him is the best way to check the BJP'',  said 
the CPI national secretary, Mr. D.Raja.

The  CPI(M-L) was equally emphatic that signing up with  the  RJD 
was  the ``wrong'' way to go about containing the BJP. The  party 
spokesman, Mr. Ranjit Abhigyan said that it would be ``naive'' to 
think  that  the BJP could be checked with the help of  the  very 
forces  which contributed to its rise. ``The RJD  is  responsible 
for  anarchy and lawlessness in the state which strengthened  the 
BJP,  and therefore we don't think you can contain the  BJP  with 
Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav's help'', he said.

Another  argument  put forward by the CPI and the CPI(M-  L)  was 
that  aligning with Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav would  mean  narrowing 
down people's options. Those opposed to the RJD would think twice 
before voting for its allies either, and might end up voting  the 
BJP-Samata-JD(U)  combine. ``Even those who would otherwise  like 
to vote for us may not do so once we are identified with the RJD, 
and they would be left with no choice but to vote for the BJP  or 
one of its allies'', said Mr. Raja. 
