
British General's visit to Pak. jeopardises jet deal with India


NEW DELHI, JAN. 22. A  500-million pound contract from the Indian 
Air  Force  for 60 British Hawk advanced jet  trainers  has  been 
jeopardised by a visit of Gen. Sir Charles Guthrie, Chief of  the 
U.K.'s Defence Staff, to Pakistan.

A  final decision in favour of British Aerospace  Systems  (BAe), 
makers of the Hawk, had been expected this month, but the  entire 
contract process has now been delayed for months as the tendering 
is subjected to a full review.

There  is understood to be unhappiness among military  chiefs  in 
New  Delhi  after  Gen. Guthrie's trip  last  week.  It  prompted 
speculation that the Ministry of Defence and Department of  Trade 
and  Industry (DTI) in London were about to resume arms sales  to 
Islamabad.

No  military export licences have been issued since October  last 
year,  following  Gen.  Pervez  Musharraf's  coup,  although  DTI 
officials said Britain had placed no arms embargo on Islamabad.

India's  Standing Committee on Defence met this week to  consider 
the  deal  and  accused the Government in  New  Delhi  of  giving 
preferential  treatment to BAe. A number of members put  pressure 
on the Indian Defence Ministry to invite more tenders,  prompting 
the Defence Secretary, Mr. T. R. Prasada, to announce a review of 
the contract. 

Concerns  were  increased on Friday by the news  of  the  British 
Prime  Minister  Mr. Tony Blair's decision to export  Hawk  spare 
parts  to Zimbabwe. Eighty arms export applications  to  Pakistan 
are pending.

Last  week  the U.K. Foreign Secretary, Mr. Robin Cook,  met  the 
Indian Foreign Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, and assured him  that 
sales to Pakistan would not resume.

The  Standing Committee on Defence wants India to consider  other 
aircraft,  in  particular  the  Russian  Yak  130,  the   Italian 
Aermacchi,   the  Spanish  Casa,  and  models  from  Brazil   and 
Argentina, none of which was available when the original  tenders 
were invited.

The  Yak  130 is up to 50 per cent cheaper than the  Hawk,  which 
costs an estimated 8.5 million pounds. BAe tendered for the order 
in 1985 along with one other company, Dassault Aviation, a French 
consortium  which  stopped production of its rival Alpha  jet  in 
1986.  One member of the standing committee was quoted Friday  as 
saying:   ``Since  the  French  company  stopped  producing   its 
[trainers],  it  is clear that the real  negotiations  are  being 
carried out only with the British.''

Bob  Lewis,  general  manager  of BAe  in  New  Delhi,  said  the 
company's policy remained unchanged. ``If the Government  chooses 
us, we're here and ready.'' 

- @ Telegraph Group Limited, London, 2000
