
Mounds of wheat lying unused


By Gargi Parsai

NEW DELHI, JAN. 22. The Government is sitting on mounds of wheat, 
incurring  heavy carrying costs, but is still far from  taking  a 
decision on enhancing the allotment from 10 kg per family of four 
under the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS).

The wheat stocks today stand at 180 lakh tonnes against the  norm 
of  84  lakh tonnes. Another 150 lakh tonnes are expected  to  be 
procured  in  the  coming rabi marketing  season.  Storage  is  a 
problem  and  offtake  under the open market  sale  is  no  great 
shakes, yet the Government is still working out various scenarios 
to reduce wheat stocks.

Wheat  imports were stopped after a 50 per cent custom  duty  was 
imposed.   An  agreement  has  been  signed  with  the   Nepalese 
Government for export of 50,000 tonnes of wheat. The open  market 
sale picked up after the sale price was reduced in December,  yet 
the progress is slow.

Storage  space  is scarce. Desperate attempts are being  made  to 
enhance storage, make it scientific and invite private investment 
in the sector. Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan 
have already reported larger areas under wheat this rabi  season. 
Steps  have  been  taken  in  Punjab  and  Haryana  for  creating 
additional storage space. A high-power committee has been set  up 
in  the  Food  Corporation of India to  make  recommendations  on 
storage capacity.

Besides  wheat  stocks, the Government is saddled  with  24  lakh 
tonnes of relaxed specification rice ``with compromised  quality, 
procured   under  pressure'',  the  Union  Minister  for   Public 
Distribution  and Consumer Affairs, Mr. Shanta Kumar,  said  here 
today, while reviewing 100 days of his Ministry' functioning.

He  conceded  that the FCI was holding old stocks  of  wheat  and 
rice.  About 3 lakh tonnes of rice stock was over two  years  old 
causing  the exchequer huge amounts in carrying costs  which  was 
Rs.  1,585  per  tonne. In a surprise raid on a  Loni  godown  in 
Delhi, the Minister found 21,000 tonnes of old rice. ``In  future 
this shall not be allowed and responsibility shall be fixed,'' he 
said.

The  Secretary,  Mr. M. D. Asthana, claimed  that  the  foodgrain 
losses  at 0.43 per cent were the lowest in the world, while  the 
1.14  per cent loss in transit was also not much given the  scale 
of  operations. The Government was examining the  possibility  of 
making Indian wheat competitive in the world market  particularly 
since  other countries provided subsidies not only on  production 
but  on exports too making international wheat prices lower  than 
domestic wheat. 

Mr.  Kumar said it had been decided to impose release  quota  and 
levy  restrictions on imported sugar, although sugar imports  had 
declined  since  the import duty was raised to 40 per  cent.  The 
imported  sugar  would  be subjected to quotas on  the  basis  of 
stocks each importer held, he said.

The  Ministry's  latest  move is to  involve  panchayats  in  the 
functioning of the Fair Price Shops which are TPDS outlets.  That 
might  impose  some control on diversion and black  marketing  of 
foodgrains.
