
No sell-out to the U.S. on QRs removal: Maran 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 22.  ``It is a travesty of truth to say  that  the 
Government  yielded  to  the U.S. on  removal  of  the  remaining 
quantitative  restrictions (QRs) on imports,'' th Union  Minister 
for  Commerce and Industry, Mr. Murasoli Maran, said here  today. 
He  was  responding to allegations that  the  BJP-led  Government 
could have negotiated a better bilateral agreement with the  U.S. 
rather  than agree as it had to an accelerated phase-out  of  all 
import controls by the year 2001.

Mr.  Maran  said  that the U.S. had in the  course  of  bilateral 
negotiations  in 1997 made ``stringent conditions'' in its  offer 
of  an  extended phase-out period of six years leaving  India  no 
choice  but to continue with the case in the  Dispute  Settlement 
Body of the World Trade Organisation. India eventually lost  that 
dispute forcing the country to come to an agreement with the U.S. 
on an earlier removal of the QRs.

The  Minister  was  referring to criticism by  the  former  Union 
Minister,  Mr. P. Chidambaram that the BJP-led Government  missed 
an opportunity to strike a favourable deal with the U.S. after  a 
positive  meeting  in late 1997 between the U.S.  President,  Mr. 
Bill  Clinton  and  the former Prime Minister,  Mr.  Inder  Kumar 
Gujral.  Mr.  Maran said that the U.S. in its  1997  offer  while 
agreeing to a six-year phase-out (which would have meant that the 
last  of  the  QRs  would have been removed  only  in  2003)  had 
insisted  that India's import controls on all sensitive  products 
should  be removed within two years. This, Mr. Maran said,  would 
have  led  to  a front-loading of the lifting of  QRs,  with  the 
controls  on products of concern to India being removed  by  1999 
itself rather than in 2001 as in the present agreement.

He  added  that the U.S. offer at that time  included  the  harsh 
condition that even during the phase-out India would have to seek 
an  annual waiver from the Balance of Payments Committee  of  the 
WTO. Accepting this condition meant running the risk of a  denial 
of  an extension of the QRs that remained even during the  phase-
out  period  of six years. The possibility of new  conditions  in 
granting  the annual waiver could also not be excluded, said  Mr. 
Maran. India therefore could not accept, he added, such an  offer 
which  would  have  been both  `humiliating'  and  `replete  with 
serious consequences' for the country.

``These issues were carefully considered by the Union Cabinet  at 
that time and it was decided that the best course would be to  go 
through  with  the dispute settlement process at the  WTO,''  Mr. 
Maran said. ``Therefore, the argument that the Government  failed 
to  come  to a favourable bilateral agreement with  the  U.S.  is 
contrary  to fact. Such criticism is a wrong inference  based  on 
gaps  in  information. The fact is that  there  were  fundamental  
disagreements with the U.S. on systemic issues,'' Mr. Maran said.

The  Commerce  Minister  said that India  had  been  autonomously 
removing  import controls, a process that had  gathered  momentum 
during  Mr.  Chidambaram's tenure as Commerce Minister.  He  said 
that the removal of QRs now did not mean the opening of the flood 
gates.  Imports  would now be regulated with tariffs  and  fiscal 
measures. ``We are only following the best practices of reform.''

Mr. Maran also denied that there any attempt to hide the  details 
of  the recent bilateral agreement with the U.S. ``The  agreement 
was  signed  by  India and the U.S. and notified to  the  WTO  on 
December  28.  A press release was issued by  the  Government  of 
India on January 11.''

``I  do  not  want  to  go  into  more  details  because  of  the 
sensitivity  of  the  budgetary process  and  the  upcoming  Exim 
policy.  But our endavour will be to give adequate protection  to 
domestic  industry. We will not be sitting on the top of  an  ash 
hill of Indian industry wearing the crown of globalisation.''

Mr. Maran also refuted the criticism that Indian industry was not 
consulted  in  the decision to remove QRs. ``Indian  industry  is 
being  taken  into  confidence and a  detailed  analysis  of  the 
removal  of  the  QRs  on  small-scale  industry  is  also  being 
undertaken.  Seminars are being held by the Commerce Ministry  to 
sensitise all concerned.''
