
Russia bogged down in Grozny 


By Vladimir Radyuhin

MOSCOW,  JAN. 22. After six days of ferocious Russian assault  on 
the Chechen capital Grozny, the rebels on Saturday were still  in 
control of two- thirds of city and even managed to capture a  top 
Russian commander and receive fresh reinforcements.

Moscow  has  admitted that a top Russian  commander  in  Chechnya 
could have fallen into Chechen hands in Grozny. Russia's  Defence 
Minister,  Marshall  Igor Sergeyev, said on  Friday  that  Major-
General Mikhail Malofeyev was missing in Grozny.Chechens said the 
General  was  being  interrogated at a  secret  location  outside 
Grozny  and  his testimony was being filmed. They said  they  had 
already  sent  a videotape to the Russian military,  who  however 
denied receiving any footage.

The  Itar-Tass  news agency on Saturday quoted  Russian  military 
sources in Chechnya as saying that rebel resistance was so strong 
that  a  daily  advance of few hundred metres  was  considered  a 
success  and  many  buildings changed hands  several  times.  The 
sources said Russian forces had brought under control a third  of 
Grozny since they had launched the attack on Monday.

Itar-Tass said the rebels had thrown into the battle ``their last 
reserves''  - the presidential guards of Chechnya's  leader,  Mr. 
Aslan  Maskhadov. The guards were earlier reported to be  in  the 
mountains  south of Grozny. The rebel commandant of  Grozny,  Mr. 
Isa Munayev, confirmed to Interfax that 180 militants had arrived 
in the city in the past few days.

Russian  soldiers  told  the NTV  television  that  the  favoured 
Chechen  tactic  in Grozny was to move through  city  underground 
passages in typical groups of three, armed with a sniper rifle, a 
machine  gun  and a grenade-launcher. Several such  groups  would 
ambush  an advancing Russian unit, catching it in  crossfire  and 
quickly  retreating before Russians called in artillery  fire  to 
pulverise buildings from where they had been fired upon. That was 
apparently how Gen. Malofeyev got captured.

The  loss  of  a  top Russian  commander  was  the  clearest  yet 
indication that the operation in Grozny had gone awry. The  Novye 
Izvestia  daily said Gen. Malofeyev had broken an  order  banning 
senior officers from joining attacking troops because he felt the 
need  to  check  personally upon  controversial  reports  he  was 
receiving from subordinates.

The  Russian military said on Saturday they had killed more  than 
500  Chechens over the past 24 hours, while losing five of  their 
own  men.  But  Russian  media  said  the  military  was  grossly 
underreporting   their  losses.  NTV  television  said   military 
hospitals  around Chechnya were overflowing with wounded  Russian  
troops  and  were  running short of  medicines.  The  TV  channel 
reported  that  a military transport plane had brought  over  140 
wounded  soldiers to Perm, in Siberia, on Thursday and  a  second 
flight   with  more  wounded  had  landed  later  that   day   in 
Yekaterenburg.
