
Afghanistan a haven for Islamic militants? 


By Kesava Menon

MANAMA  (BAHRAIN)  JAN. 22. As Arab Governments  turn  decisively 
against   Islamic  militants,  one  remarkable  feature  is   the 
ubiquitousness  of the ``Afghani'' phenomenon. Whether it is  the 
long-standing  militant movement in Algeria or the  more  nascent 
one  in  Lebanon, those Arab nationals who took part in  and  got 
radicalised in the Afghan war are seen to have emerged as central 
figures.  The  concerned governments cannot take  up  the  matter 
directly  with  the  Taliban since none of  them  recognises  the 
regime  in Kabul and they have also not made public whether  they 
have  taken  up the matter with Islamabad which too has  a  major 
contributory role. 

In  Algeria, the security forces are reported to have ringed  the 
bases  of the remaining radical groups to liquidate them. One  of 
the  major militant movements - the Islamic Salvation Army and  a 
smaller faction the Islamic League for Preaching and Jihad - have 
dissolved themselves and their cadres are to assist the  Algerian 
army in the crack-down. This combination of soldiers and reformed 
militants  is waiting for the green signal to launch  attacks  on 
the  Armed  Islamic  Group  (GIA)  and  the  Salafist  Group  for 
Preaching and Combat. 

If  optimistic  projections  bear out  and  the  security  forces 
succeed  in their operation, they would wipe out the  hard-  core 
which  has  taken  terrorism to new depths over  the  last  eight 
years.   The  security  forces  are  holding  back  because   the 
Government  has  extended by a few days the period  during  which 
militants  not  guilty  of  serious  crimes  can  seek   amnesty.  
Throughout the Algerian crisis, the role of the ``Afghanis''  has 
been known to be a crucial one. With their combat experience  and 
ideological  training, those Algerians who had taken part in  the 
Afghan war against the Soviets are believed to have provided  the 
frame-work for the militant groups. 

In  fact, after the Algerians began to get the upper hand from  a 
few years ago, it was believed that the leader of the GIA,  Anton 
Zoubari  (a known ``Afghani''), had taken refuge in  Afghanistan. 
But he was recently said to have been spotted ruing an  encounter 
and it is unclear whether the earlier reports of him having  fled 
to  Afghanistan were accurate or whether he had chosen to  return 
at  a  time  when  the GIA could  emerge  as  the  sole  militant 
movement. 

If Islamic militancy in Algeria seems to be entering its terminal 
stage, the militancy in Lebanon appears to be entering into a new 
and  dangerous phase. Through much of the 1970s and 80s,  Lebanon 
was wracked by warfare between its ethnic militias - Shiite  Amal 
and  Hizbollah, Druze, Phalangist and Sunni - but they had  begun 
to observe a tentative truce if not complete peace since the Taif  
Agreement  of  1989. However, recently there has  risen  the  new 
phenomenon of a radical Sunni group which has decided to take  on 
the Lebanese army. Earlier this month, this group which has  been 
training  near the Syrian border ambushed a unit of the  Lebanese 
army  and  11  soldiers  and 30  militants  were  killed  in  the 
fighting. 

Not  many  details  are  known about this  new  Sunni  group  but 
Lebanese  newspapers report that it is believed to be part  of  a 
loose network of militant groups which have ``Afghanis'' at their 
core and draw at least a part of their funding from the al  Qaeda 
of  Saudi dissident, Osama bin Laden. The leader of the  Lebanese 
group who was reportedly killed in the encounter - Bassam Kanj  - 
was said to be an ``Afghani''. The emergence of this Sunni  group 
spells  bad  news for a Lebanon which is  still  delicately  held 
together.  But  it could also pose a long term  threat  to  Syria 
where  the Alawites, a Shia off-shoot, dominate a  society  which 
has a Sunni majority. 

Developments  in Sudan are at a shaky stage. But from the  manner 
in  which  the  President,  Lt. Gen. Omar  al  Bashir,  has  been 
courting  regional  States  for  assistance  in  arriving  at  an 
agreement  with  opposition  groups, it  would  appear  that  the 
Government is readying itself for a show-down with the Islamists. 

It is early days yet but if the Sudanese Government decides to go 
against the Islamists, if for no other reason than to please  the 
U.S.,  it  would mean that yet another Arab  country  has  turned 
against the Islamists. 

The current head of the Islamic radical group which  assassinated 
Anwar  Sadat,  former Egyptian President, is believed to  be  yet 
another  militant who has taken refuge in Afghanistan. These  are 
the underlying causes which have restrained these Arab  countries 
from recognising the Taliban. 

Unofficially,  all  these Governments also state that  they  have 
been  taking up the matter with Pakistan but it is  probably  the 
necessity of retaining the semblance of Islamic solidarity  which 
prevents them from talking about it more openly. 
