
I could have grabbed power twice: Wiranto 


By P. S. Suryanarayana 

SINGAPORE,  JAN. 22 Indonesia's Senior Minister for Politics  and 
Security,  Gen.  Wiranto, who was the overall  commander  of  the 
armed forces (TNI) until October last, has said he had restrained 
from  staging a military coup when he could have  easily  grabbed 
power  on two occasions in the last two years. Gen. Wiranto  told 
journalists  in Jakarta that he did not, however, wish to  flaunt 
his restraint as the issue was sensitive.

Gen.  Wiranto is the man at the centre of the ongoing  debate  in 
Indonesia  over the probability of the military striking  against 
the  President, Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid. Gen. Wiranto is no  longer 
in active service despite the military insignia that he continues 
to  hold even after becoming the highest ranking Minister in  Mr. 
Wahid's   Cabinet.  Yet,  he  is  generally  believed  to   wield 
significant   influence  among  the  TNI  leaders.  The   present 
commander of the TNI, Adm. Widodo, was appointed to that post  by 
Mr. Wahid in consultation with Gen. Wiranto.

Gen.  Wiranto's comments came amid international  concerns  about 
the future governance of a country wanting to stabilise itself as 
the world's third largest democracy. He is reported to have  said 
that  he voluntarily let go at least two occasions when he  could 
have, as the then TNI commander, opted for coup. 

The first such occasion was the resignation by Gen. Suharto  from 
the powerful constitutional post of President in May, 1998 in the 
face  of a popular revolt against him. Gen. Wiranto  pointed  out 
that  he had in fact overseen the transfer of power to  the  then 
Vice-President, Mr. B. J. Habibie. 

The other instance when the Army could have grabbed power was  in 
the  face  of intransigence by the students who  had  seized  the 
Parliament complex  in protest against Mr. Habibie's emergence as 
President in May, 1998. 

Gen.  Wiranto's  comments,  which he is  reported  to  have  made 
yesterday to sections of the Indonesian media, acquire meaning in 
the  context  of  a  flurry of  statements  by  several  military 
officials  pledging loyalty to Mr. Wahid and the earlier  warning 
by the U.S. against military intervention in Indonesia.
