
Ecuador President ousted in coup? 


QUITO  (ECUADOR),  JAN. 22. Ecuador's military chief  said  early 
today that a three-man provisional junta that took power after  a 
chaotic rebellion had been dissolved and that the Vice-President, 
Mr. Gustavo Noboa, would assume power.

There was no immediate word on when or if Mr. Noboa would  assume 
the  presidency. Nor was there any confirmation  that  President, 
Mr. Jamil Mahuad, had resigned the office.

Mr.  Noboa said he would assume the Andean  country's  presidency 
with the support of the armed forces and national police. He told 
presspersons  that, ``I have the support of the armed forces  and 
national police.'' However, the legal basis for his move was  not 
clear. 

The military chief, Gen. Carlos Mendoza, said in an interview  on 
the  Ecuador  radio  that he had joined the  junta  to  ``prevent 
bloodshed.'' Gen. Mendoza said his decision to dissolve the junta 
came after discussions with U.S. officials.

The  development  followed  a  whirlwind  of  events  that  began 
yesterday  morning  when  Indian  protesters  joined  by   junior 
military   officers  stormed  Congress  and  the  Supreme   Court 
demanding Mr. Mahuad's ouster.

Gen.  Mendoza,  Chairman of Ecuador's joint  chiefs  and  Defence 
Minister   since   last  week,  later  requested   Mr.   Mahuad's 
resignation  and  the President had  abandoned  the  presidential 
palace.

Scores of heavily armed soldiers in combat fatigues took over the 
palace and Gen. Mendoza announced late yesterday the formation of 
a three-man provisional junta consisting of him, an Indian leader 
and a former Supreme Court justice. 

Ecuador's neighbors and the U.S. objected and the U.S.  officials 
said any overthrow of the constitutional order would mean that  a 
severing  of aid from Washington and a boycott  by  international 
investors.

Mr. Carlos Solorzano, former Supreme Court judge who was part  of 
the junta, told AP that Mr. Mahuad would be tried, though he  did 
not  specify  for  what. Many Ecuadoreans accuse  Mr.  Mahuad  of 
protecting corrupt bankers and officials.

Gen.  Mendoza  told  reporters that the junta did  not  know  Mr. 
Mahuad's whereabouts. 
