
Accord reached on Agartala-Dhaka bus service 


By Haroon Habib

DHAKA,  JAN. 22. Bangladesh and India have agreed, in  principle, 
to  run bus service between Agartala and Dhaka, a decision  which 
the people of Tripura have been dreaming for decades.

The  understanding came during talks between the visiting  Indian 
Minister of State for External Affairs, Mr. Ajit Kumar Panja, and 
the  Prime Minister, Ms. Sheikh Hasina, and other leaders.  Later 
addressing  newsmen  at  the State Guest House,  Mr.  Panja  said 
modalities of the proposed service will be worked out between the 
two countries.

Mr.  Panja  was making the statement hours before  his  departure 
ending  a three-day visit here, the first by any Indian  Minister 
to Bangladesh after the new Government was installed in New Delhi 
last October.

The two countries have also signed a Memorandum of  Understanding 
(MoU)   to   institutionalise  cooperation  in   the   field   of 
agriculture.  The  specific  areas of  cooperation  will  include 
fisheries,  jute  production and cultivation,  animal  husbandry, 
bio-technology, and agri-research. An official press release said 
the accord will promote development of cooperation in agriculture 
science   and  technology,  agriculture  production   and   agro-
processing between the two neighbours.

The  Agriculture  Minister,  Mrs.  Motia  Chowdhury,  the   State 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs, Mr. Abul  Hasan  Chowdhury,  the 
Bangladesh  High  Commissioner  to  India  Mr.  Mostafa   Faruque 
Mohammad  and the Indian High Commissioner to Bangladesh Mr.  Deb 
Mukharji were present.

Mr.  Panja  said the bus service is part of the overall  idea  of 
linking  the countries of the region including Bhutan, Nepal  and 
Myanmar with a unified communication network to help movement  of 
people and goods among them in comfort and economically.

Mr. Panja said an agreement on movement of goods between the  two 
countries  (at  Benapole  and Petrapole) was ready  and  will  be 
signed soon.

As for passenger train, he said discussions were continuing. ``We 
want  to have an arrangement like that in Europe  where  passport 
and  visa  are  examined  in trains to  the  convenience  of  the 
passengers,''  he said, adding ``discussions are taking place  in 
that direction.''
