
G-7 meet: Ministers issue alert against graft 


TOKYO, JAN. 22. The Group of Seven nations today issued an  alert 
against corruption, warning that it could undermine the  benefits 
of the global financial system.

Besides  money  laundering  and harmful  tax  competition,  ``the 
benefits and opportunities of the international financial  system 
can also be undermined by corruption,'' a G-7 communique said.

``We  support  the  work  being done in  various  fora  on  anti-
corruption measures,'' said the statement issued after a  one-day 
meeting of the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank  Governors. 
``We  expect  the international financial  institutions  to  also 
strengthen  governance  and  anti-money  laundering  measures  in 
programmes  with  member  countries.'' The  G-7  groups  Britain, 
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United States.

The  group  bowed  to increasing U.S. alarm and  issued  a  joint 
warning  that  the world needs more balanced  growth,  especially 
from sluggish Japan.

``We  see improved prospects for non-inflationary growth  in  the 
major  industrial economies and the world economy as  a  whole,'' 
said the statement. ``But the challenge remains to secure a  more 
balanced pattern of growth among our economies that is  important 
to sustaining the expansion''.

Immediately  after the meeting, the U.S. Treasury Secretary,  Mr. 
Lawrence Summers, rammed home the point, demanding Japan open its 
markets to ensure faster growth critical to the world.

``What is most important for Japan and what is most important for 
the  global economy is that sustained domestic demand-led  growth 
be achieved in Japan,'' Mr. Summers said.

Japan won a G-7 endorsement for its fears that a strong yen would 
eat  away  at  the value of its exports, one of  the  few  strong 
pillars of its fragile recovery. The financial chiefs agreed with 
Japan's  concern about possible damage inflicted by the high  yen 
on Japan and the world economy.

``We  will continue to monitor developments in  exchange  markets 
and cooperate as appropriate,'' they said in the joint statement.

But  the Japanese Finance Minister, Mr. Kiichi  Miyazawa,  warned 
that  Japan's future hinged on private demand. ``Now is the  time 
to  expect  a recovery consumption in private  consumption,''  he 
told a news conference after the meeting. ``Without it we  cannot 
expect the economy to suddenly record growth of three per cent or 
so.''  In the past two years alone, Japan has forked out about  $ 
552 billions in extra spending to stimulate demand.

Mr.  Summers  said  fiscal policy was only part  of  the  answer, 
however,    pointing   to   Japan's   failure   to    open    its 
telecommunications market in line with Washington demands.

The  G-7 statement stressed the need to ``take advantage  of  the 
investment  opportunities created by new technologies,''  echoing 
U.S.  frustration at Japan's failure to push along  the  Internet 
bandwagon with lower telephone costs. 

- AFP
