
Pak. plays down U.S. statement 


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD, JAN. 22. Americans are concerned about terrorism as  a 
``global phenomenon'', a Pakistani Foreign Office spokesman  said 
in  response to the strong statement of concern from the U.S.  on 
Friday about terrorist groups operating from Pakistani soil. 

The spokesman, when asked specifically what Pakistan proposed  to 
do about groups like the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, did not respond to 
the question. 

The  spokesman, however, said the American delegation led by  the 
Assistant  Secretary of State, Mr. Karl Inderfurth, carried  back 
the impression that Pakistan was as concerned about terrorism  as 
anyone else. 

Asked  what  steps Pakistan was taking to locate  and  bring  the 
hijackers  of  the  Indian  Airlines  aircraft  to  justice,  the 
spokesman said the question carried some ``presumptions''. 

The  Indians,  he claimed, had not given any ``clue''  about  the 
identity  of the hijackers. ``Finding phantoms is not easy,''  he 
maintained,  adding that if apprehended, the hijackers  would  be 
prosecuted. 

The  U.S. fears the safety of its nationals living in Pakistan  - 
groups like the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen and the Lashkar-i-Taiba have 
repeatedly  threatened  American  nationals -  so,  the  American 
statement is rooted in its own concerns. 

However, when a senior U.S. official says that the ``presence and 
activities  of  these  (extremist) groups gives  Pakistan  a  bad 
international  opinion  in  the world community  and  thus  works 
against Pakistan's national interest'', it is time for  Islamabad 
to sit up and take notice. 

If,  however, Pakistan takes a business-as-usual approach to  the 
American  concerns on terrorism, then it is in danger  of  losing 
further  face with the international community, particularly  the 
U.S. 

As  of now, extremist groups have open offices  across  Pakistan. 
The  representatives of these groups hold press  conferences  and 
issue statements and collect funds for their ``jehadi causes'' in 
full public view. It should not be very difficult for Pakistan to 
put a stop to all this. 

The  Kandahar hijacking, which affected a single  U.S.  national, 
seems  to have placed the spotlight back on the groups  operating 
from Pakistani soil. 

PTI reports:

Concerned  over  Pakistan's  support  to  Afghanistan's   Taliban 
regime, ``which harbours and protects'' Osama Bin laden, the U.S. 
today asked Islamabad to ``use its influence'' with the religious 
militia to have the Saudi dissident expelled from Afghanistan and 
take him to a place ``where he can be brought to justice''. 
