
All parties face problems 


By Rajesh Ahuja

CHANDIGARH, JAN. 22. Even as countdown has begun for the Assembly 
elections  in  Haryana on February 22, political parties  in  the 
State  are  virtually  in  a  shambles  over  the  selection   of 
candidates notwithstanding tall claims of unity and coordination.

The  ruling Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) is in a  dilemma  over 
its alliance with the Bharatiya Janata Party which has  developed 
cracks  thanks  to the intransigent stand adopted by  the  latter 
over  sharing  of seats. According to highly-placed  sources,  in 
case this dispute is not resolved immediately, the alliance could 
well be a thing of the past as the Chief Minister, Mr. Om Prakash 
Chautala,  who  is also the INLD supremo, is  determined  not  to 
concede even an inch to the BJP on this issue.

Interestingly, though it is being mentioned in political  circles 
that  the row between the two parties would be resolved  amicably 
with  the intervention of the Punjab Chief Minister, Mr.  Prakash 
Singh Badal, knowledgeable sources assert that the situation  has 
gone beyond intervention. Mr. Chautala's stand is clear and final 
- ticket will be distributed not according to party  affiliations 
but as per winning prospects.

The  BJP is adamant that it will contest not less than 35 of  the 
90  seats  as  per a formula which, they claim,  was  worked  out 
between Mr. Chautala and the BJP high command before the Assembly 
was  dissolved  prematurely. The Chief  Minister,  interestingly, 
asserts  that  no  such formula was  ever  coined.  According  to 
sources, Mr. Chautala has so far been dealing patiently with  the 
BJP hoping that the issue would be resolved amicably and the  two 
parties  would repeat the grand performance during  the  recently 
held Lok Sabha polls when the entire opposition was wiped out.

However,  if  things do not settle down, Mr.  Chautala  is  under 
great  pressure from INLD cadres to go it alone.The  BJP  leaders 
say  they  are prepared to fight the 90 Assembly seats  on  their 
own.  However, political observers feel the BJP may be the  loser 
in such an eventuality.

It  is  being said in INLD circles that the former  Deputy  Prime 
Minister, Mr. Devi Lal, had gauged the scenario correctly when he 
recently  asserted that the BJP was not in a position to  contest 
over  20 seats. They say if the BJP decides to go it  alone,  Mr. 
Chautala  would  be the gainer in any case as the  non-Jat  votes 
would be divided between the Congress and the BJP.

Observers  also  feel that if the INLD and the BJP were  to  part 
company,  Mr. Chautala could field a few Ministers, who  had  won 
the last Assembly polls as Independents, as INLD candidates  from 
Panipat, Hissar, Indri, Ambala Cantt., Chachrauli and Narnaul  to  
cite some examples. Some of these candidates have already  opened 
election   offices   as   Independents   in   their    respective 
constituencies. Interestingly, there is resentment among the INLD 
grassroots workers against the BJP for its anti-INLD stance which 
became  evident after the Union Home Minister, Mr. L. K.  Advani, 
exhorted  the  BJP  in  Haryana at a  party  conclave  in  Rohtak 
recently  to  carve a niche of its own in  State  politics.  This 
resentment  could come out openly in case the two parties  go  it 
alone.

There  is optimism in the INLD that the party has  established  a 
foothold  among urban voters thanks to the abolition  of  chungi, 
improved  law  and  order situation, streamlining  of  sales  tax 
procedures  and  restoration  of  grant  to  the  Agroha  Medical 
College.

As for the Congress, the claims of ``unity'' have proved to be  a 
``hype''  so  far  as tickets distribution is  concerned  as  all 
factions  have  staked their claims for almost all the  90  seats 
making it tough for the party high command to finalise the  list. 
The  AICC general secretary, Mr. Moti Lal Vora and  senior  party 
leader,  Mr.  Madhavrao  Scindia, have been  given  the  task  of 
finalising the candidates at the earliest.
