
Govt. agrees to hike junior doctors' stipend by 50 p.c. 


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  22. The State Government has agreed to  give  a 
hike  of  50  per cent on the present stipend  amount  to  junior 
doctors, and asked them to give up the agitation and join  duties 
keeping in view the sufferings inflicted on people.

Addressing a press conference here on Saturday, the Minister  for 
School  Education, Mr. K. Srihari, and the Minister  for  Medical 
and Health, Dr. S. Aruna, said that the Chief Minister  responded 
favourably  to  the  demands  of the  striking  doctors  after  a 
delegation met him in the morning.

The 50 per cent hike meant substantial increase in the amounts to 
various  categories, they said. House surgeons, who were  getting 
Rs.  2,099  earlier,  would now get Rs. 2,900,  first  year  P.G. 
students  would get Rs. 4,800 instead of Rs. 3,148,  second  year 
students  Rs. 5,000 instead of Rs. 3,324 and third year  students 
Rs. 5,200 instead of Rs. 3,498.

PG  Diploma students are now entitled to a stipend of  Rs.  4,800 
(first year) and Rs. 5,000 (second year). 

Those doing super specialities would get Rs. 5,500 and Rs. 6,000.

The  Ministers  said that it was the best  offer  the  Government 
could  make  and it was upto the striking doctors  to  favourably 
respond  by joining duties. There was concurrence on  four  other 
demands.

They  said the Government had agreed to 50 per cent hike  despite 
the  fact that it meant an additional burden of Rs.  4.24  crores 
per annum on this count.

Strike continues

According  to  a report from Guntur,  the  doctors  ``continued'' 
their  strike  which was ``temporarily  suspended''  on  Thursday 
night,   the  general  secretary  of  the  AP   Junior   Doctors' 
Association, Dr. M. Jayachandra Naidu, said.

Dr.  Naidu  said  the Chief Minister ``failed  to  stick  to  his 
promise''.  Though the doctors believed that the  Chief  Minister 
would  implement the promise, the change of stance was  indicated 
when the Government made it clear that their problems were  under 
the consideration of the Cabinet sub-committee. 

He sought to know how far the ``breach of promise'' by the  Chief 
Minister  was justified. Dr. Naidu said that the  Chief  Minister 
should  own up the responsibility for the loss and  inconvenience 
caused to poor people due to the doctors' strike. 

Meanwhile,  the  junior  doctors  in  King  George  Hospital   in 
Visakhapatnam  served  an ultimatum on the State  Government  for 
resolving  their issues amicably by Sunday morning failing  which 
they would stop attending even emergency cases and intensify  the 
agitation.

Announcing  this at a press conference, Dr. Someswar,  leader  of 
the  junior  doctors,  revealed that they had  already  served  a 
strike  notice  again  and resumed their strike  on  Saturday  to 
attend only emergency cases. 

The  Government  should  come out with a decision by  8  a.m.  on 
Sunday, he said. A joint action committee with representatives of 
post-graduates, under-graduates and house-surgeons was formed  to 
decide the further course of action, he stated.

``We  have called off our strike as soon as our  Chief  Minister, 
Mr.  N.  Chandrababu Naidu, assured us of  resolving  our  issues 
immediately.  But nothing has been done till date and though  our 
leaders are making frantic efforts to meet him, he has failed  to 
respond properly for the last couple of days. This is not what we 
expect of a hi-tech Chief Minister.''
