
CM seeks Singapore's help 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 22. The Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi,  today 
sought the involvement of Singapore in improving port  facilities 
in  the State, while the Singapore Prime Minister, Mr.  Goh  Chok 
Tong,  proposed a role for his country in  expanding  polytechnic 
education in Tamil Nadu.

During his discussions with Mr. Goh, who was accompanied by a 43-
member   delegation,  Mr.  Karunanidhi  referred  to  the   State 
Government's proposal to develop a medium-sized port at Cuddalore 
and  said this could be considered for further development  based 
on  a government-to-government agreement or with  private  sector 
companies in Singapore.

Mr.  Goh responded by stating that the Singapore  Government  did 
not make direct investments in any project outside Singapore  but 
he would ask Singapore companies to examine the proposal.

Mr.  Goh referred to the potential available in Chennai port  for 
upgradation  and  expansion  and the high  tariff  on  containers 
imported  into the port and meant for re-export. He also  pointed 
out an anomaly involved in the import of cargo handling equipment 
wherein importers were being obliged to repay the import cost  in 
dollars, while the use of the cranes within India did not involve 
realisation of foreign currency.

The  Chief Minister assured Mr. Goh that he would take  up  these 
issues with the Union Government. Mr. Goh suggested ensuring good 
access  to the Chennai port for improving the efficiency of  port 
operations.

Mr.  Karunanidhi  offered  to allot well-developed  land  on  the 
outskirts of Chennai with world-class infrastructure for locating 
Singapore  companies,  for which purpose he  would  approach  the 
Central Government to grant the Free Trade Zone (FTZ) status. 

Expressing  appreciation  of the efforts made by  Tamil  Nadu  to 
build human resources in the information technology (IT)  sector, 
Mr.  Goh said the proposed ``information backbone'' being set  up 
by this State could be connected to Singapore through fibre optic 
links,  according to an official release. He said  the  Singapore 
Telecom could be contacted for this purpose. 

Tamil  Nadu's  representatives  informed him  that  the  backbone 
project did involve a plan to establish an international  gateway 
for  which discussions were on with FLAG Telecom and other  long-
distance under-sea cable providers.

Mr. Goh suggested that the National Science and Technology  Board 
(NTSB)  of  Singapore  could be involved  in  implementing  Tamil  
Nadu's  plan  to set up an incubator for IT  companies.  He  also 
pointed  out that venture capital was available in  Singapore  to 
finance IT start-ups.

Mr.  Goh suggested that polytechnics from Singapore could set  up 
sister  institutions in Tamil Nadu on a private sector  franchise 
arrangement for imparting high-end skills, for which land  needed 
could be allotted by Tamil Nadu on a non-commercial basis. 

Trainees  from such institutions could be employed in  Singapore, 
he  said.  Mr. Karunanidhi assured Mr. Goh  that  such  proposals 
would  be  considered quickly and favourably. In response  to  an 
offer  made  by  Mr.  Karunanidhi  to  provide  land  and   other 
facilities for setting up a garments park in view of Tamil Nadu's 
traditional  strength in textiles, Mr. Goh said  Singapore's  own 
strength  in  this  sector  could be used  in  pursuance  of  the 
suggestion  if  there  were no garment  export  quotas.  (Textile 
quotas imposed by developed countries are due to be phased out by 
2005). 
