
CLP to execute project with Indian partner 


By Our Special Correspondent

BANGALORE,  JAN.  22. The China Light Power Company  (CLP)  today 
informed  the  Karnataka Government its resolve  to  execute  the 
much-delayed  1000  MW thermal power project  near  Mangalore  by 
involving an Indian partner.

The  CLP Business Development Director, Mr. Tom Watters,  had  an 
hour-long  meeting  with  the Chief  Minister,  Mr.  S.M.Krishna. 
Cogentrix and CLP had floated the MPC as a subsidiary to  execute 
the  mega thermal project near Nandikur in the  Dakshina  Kannada 
District in 1995.

Mr.  Watters, who was accompanied by the MPC Project  Development 
Director,  Mr.  Siddarth  Mathur, said the  company  was  in  the 
process of identifying an Indian partner.

Mr. Krishna, emerging from the meeting, said the CLP and the  MPC 
had communicated that they would be executing the project with an 
Indian  partner  and  had  accepted the  conditions  set  by  the 
Government and also the Centre's new guidelines. The MPC Managing 
Director, Mr. Ron Somers, was not present.

Mr.  Krishna  said  he  had explained to  the  CLP  and  the  MPC 
representatives  that because of shift in stance of  the  Centre, 
there  was a change in the format in which the project had to  be 
executed, and the PPA had to be reconsidered.

Mr.   Krishna  said  the  authorities  of  the  Karnataka   Power 
Transmission  Corporation (KPTCL) and representatives of the  CLP 
and  the  MPC  would be holding  consultations  with  the  expert 
committee  headed  by  Mr. Deepak Parekh, set  up  by  the  State 
Government  to  study the project, at its  meeting  scheduled  on 
January 28.

The  Chief  Minister said he had asked the CLP to decide  on  the 
project by February and commence the work.

Mr.  Watters, responding to queries from presspersons,  said  the 
Chief  Minister had explained to them the situation  clearly.  He 
said his company was hopeful of finding an Indian partner quickly 
and added the quantum of stakes to be offered to the Indian  firm 
was  yet  to be finalised. He said the CLP had agreed  for  minor 
amendments to the PPA and claimed the power produced by it  using 
coal would be the lowest among others.

He  said the work was likely to commence in six months and  power 
would be generated in about four years. The company had  accepted 
all conditions of the Government.

The CLP and the MPC presented a note on the project to the  Chief  
Minister  during  the  discussion,  in which  it  said  it  would 
operationalise a ``world class'' coal plant, which would be  more 
thermally-efficient  and produce cheaper electricity than a  gas-
based  plant,  as the State was toying with idea  of  encouraging 
LNG-based power plant.
