
Centre to go ahead with Constitutional reforms: Jethmalani 


By Our Special Correspondent

KOCHI,  JAN. 22. The Union Minister for Law, Justice and  Company 
Affairs,  Mr.  Ram  Jethmalani, has said  that  his  Ministry  is 
``ready'' for constitutional reforms.

He  was inaugurating a symposium on ``Does the Constitution  need 
any  change  -  if so, what and why'', organised  by  the  Kerala 
chapter of the Indian Association of Lawyers here this evening.

The  Minister  said  that as the nodal  agency  for  implementing 
constitutional  reforms,  his Ministry had already  prepared  the 
terms and conditions of the Constitutional Review Committee,  the 
tentative  formation of the committee members and the time  frame 
within which the reforms should be implemented.

However,   he  hastened  to  add  that  the  formation   of   the 
Constitutional  Review Committee was not in the top  priority  of 
the  Government  which has been facing a host of  other  pressing 
issues of late.

The  Minister said that constitutional review was  inevitable  in 
certain circumstances and the Government would go ahead with  it. 
He  recalled  that even before the elections, it  became  certain 
that amendments to the Constitution were necessary to extend  the 
reservation  for SC/ST when the 10-year period was coming  to  an 
end.

He said that Opposition members had created a hue and cry when  a 
Delhi newspaper reported that the Government was going ahead with 
``changing  the  Constitution''. He said that he still  held  the 
Constitution as sacrosanct and there was no secret agenda  behind 
the Government's intention to change the Constitution.

He quoted from a seminar conducted by the JRD Tata Memorial  last 
November in Mumbai where it was pointed out that the doyen of the 
industrial  house had envisaged changes in the Constitution  some 
three  decades back. The noted jurist, Mr. Nani  Palkhivala,  had 
also  advocated review of the Constitution and it was not  he  or 
the BJP which was speaking first about constitutional review.

Elaborating  on  the theme, Mr. Jethmalani pointed out  that  the 
Constitution  had served the nation to a great extent  though  it 
did  require  a  second  look  at  times.  Illustrating  a  point 
regarding  judicial  accountability,  he  said  the  Constitution 
should be so amended that the appointments, transfers and removal 
of  the  higher  echelons of the judiciary could be  rid  of  the 
present cumbersome procedures.

Citing the Justice Ramaswamy case, Mr. Jethmalani said it was the 
abstention  of  a  political party which  resulted  in  the  non- 
impeachment  of the judge. The National Judiciary  Commission  is 
being  proposed to alter these anomalies and he recalled that  he 
had  introduced a Private Member's Bill in Parliament long  back, 
but  it  met  the  same  fate  as  all  private  members'   bills 
languishing in the archives.

According  to  him, public interest will be strengthened  by  the 
reforms  to  the  Constitution. He listed  three  occasions  when 
Constitution  amendment would become imperative. They  are:  when 
the existing provisions in the Constitution do not give any  firm 
guideline  to  a  newly-developed  situation;  when  the   courts 
interpret  or  misinterpret the constitutional  provisions  whose 
implementation result in manifest public mischief; when a part or 
provision  of the Constitution, which is based  upon  fundamental 
philosophy, is found increasingly abandoned by the people.

Mr.  Jethmalani  said the Home Minister  had  reiterated  umpteen 
times that the Government did not intend to tinker with the basic 
features  of the Constitution. However, he recalled  that  during 
earlier  period, there was debate by learned jurists on the  need 
for demolishing the Keshavanda Bharathi doctrine.

This   doctrine  covered  almost  85  to  90  per  cent  of   the 
Constitution   and  what  the  proposed  constitutional   reforms 
committee intends to do was only to deal with the remaining 10 to 
15 per cent of the constitutional provisions.

He  also referred to the sweeping powers conferred on the  Centre 
under Article 356 of the Constitution. He said that Kerala  would 
be one of the first in the country to have experienced the ``evil 
effects'' of the Article empowering the disbanding of a  properly 
elected Government by the Centre. ``Does not this Article 356  be 
put in it proper shape?'' he asked.

He  said the Supreme Court had ruled that every decision  of  the 
Central  Government  on  Article  356 was  beyond  the  scope  of 
judicial review. Does this not be changed? he asked.

The  former  judge  of Supreme Court, Mr.  V.  R.  Krishna  Iyer, 
presided.  The Advocate General, Mr. M. K. Damodaran, the  senior 
lawyer,   Mr.  K.  Chandrasekharan,  the  secretary   of   Indian 
Association  of Lawyers, Mr. S. Parameswaran, the  former  judge, 
Mr.  T.  Chandrasekhara Menon, and the joint  secretary,  Mr.  A. 
Jaysankar  of the association were among those who spoke  at  the 
symposium.
