
'Orissa, Centre to blame for cyclone survivors' plight'


By Our Staff Correspondent

BHUBANESWAR,  JAN.  22.  Blaming both the Centre  and  the  State 
Government  for their failure to improve the lot of the  cyclone-
survivors  in  the coastal districts of Orissa,  the  noted  film 
director, Mr. Mahesh Bhatt today said that there had not been any 
change  in  the situation in the storm-ravaged  area  even  three 
months after the tragedy. 

Addressing  a press conference here, Mr. Bhatt said  that  during 
his  tour  of the worst-hit Ersama block and adjoining  areas  in 
Jagatsinghpur district on Friday, he came across the corpses of a 
woman and a child at Padmapur village still lying unattended  and 
rice  being  sold  at Rs. 4.50 paise in a ration  shop  at  Paida 
village as against the stipulated price of Rs. 4. 

Taking  a  dig  at the Government  machinery  at  the  grassroots 
levels,  Mr.  Bhatt said: ``If such was the  situation  in  rural 
India  on  the 21st day of the new millennium, how is  our  Prime 
Minister claiming that this century was going to be of Indians?'' 

Mr.  Bhatt,  who  came  to visit the  cyclone-hit  areas  on  the 
invitation of Oxfam (India), said that he had no plans to make  a 
film  on  the super-cyclone. ``Human tragedy has  always  been  a 
marketable  commodity. But I don't have any plans to make a  film 
on the super-cyclone.''

He clarified that his visit was aimed at bringing back the plight 
of  the  cyclone survivors to the centre-stage. ``I will  try  my 
best to keep the issue alive,'' he said. He further said that  he 
would  write about his visit to the affected areas to  newspapers 
so that people could know what he wanted to say. 

Mr.  Bhatt  observed  that with their dreams  gone,  the  cyclone 
survivors  could  use  their  anger  as  a  weapon  to  draw  the 
Government's attention.

He expressed apprehension that the survivors might perish if  the 
coastal  districts experiences heatwave conditions in the  coming 
days.  ``The  polythene  sheets,  which  make  the  roof  of  the 
temporary  shelters,  would  not help  the  survivors  fight  the 
scorching sun.''

About  their  meeting  with the  Chief  Minister,  Mr.  Hemananda 
Biswal,   this  morning,  Mr.  Bhatt  said:  ``I  saw  signs   of 
helplessness  in  Mr. Biswal, but that is not going to  help.  He 
must act, and pull the local authorities and bureaucracy for  the 
lapses.''

Ms. Chandra also blamed those in the seat of power. ``They should 
admit that they had completely failed in providing proper help to  
the cyclone-affected people''.
