
Church at the crossroads 


The  spotlight  trained  on the Vatican by the  Jubilee  Year  is 
picking out many of the dissensions which exist within the  Roman 
Catholic Church. VAIJU NARAVANE takes a look.

THE  VATICAN  is bathed in soft winter sunshine and  St.  Peter's 
Basilica  glows,  luminous.  But in this  Jubilee  or  Holy  Year 
marking   2000  years  of  Christianity,  Rome  looks   strangely 
deserted.

The  word Jubilee, as defined by the Tertio Millenio  Adveniente, 
the  Apostolic  Letter  in  which Pope  John  Paul  II  made  his 
proclamation, means ``A year of the Lord's favour''. It is,  says 
Mr.  Mario Sensi, who writes for Il Giornale del Pellegrino  (The 
Pilgrim's Journal), ``the Year of God, of the Human Being, of the 
Poor,  of  solidarity, communion,  hope,  liberation,  salvation, 
justice, love, trust, reconciliation, newness, grace and charity. 
In short an Annus Benignitatis, a blessed or benign year.

But  few Romans would agree with that definition. For  them,  the 
Jubilee so far has been very disappointing. The Vatican taxi rank 
is lined with waiting cabs and Antonio is angry. 

``I've spent forty minutes waiting for a client. Usually the wait 
here  is  no more than ten minutes. In Italy we are  terrific  at 
missing  opportunities.  The Vatican made such a  din  about  the 
expected  35  million  visitors that  we  scared  everyone  away, 
tourists  and pilgrims alike. They jacked up the prices sky  high 
and  now no one is able to sell. Hotel rooms are  going  abegging 
and  there are four stray cats at the Sistine Chapel.  There  are 
not even any Japanese to ferry around! This Jubileo is worse than 
normal years for business,'' he says.

The  guards at the Vatican museum spend time smoking,  joking  or 
talking  to their girlfriends on their mobile phones. ``Our  duty 
roster  is fixed several months in advance. They  were  expecting 
such  huge  crowds that we were ordered to do three  extra  hours 
each day. But the crowds are just not there.

``True, we worked very hard over Christmas and New Year when  the 
Pope  opened the Holy doors and we are likely to see  big  crowds 
over Easter. But we are going to see nowhere near the 35  million 
people  expected  to visit the Vatican this year,'' one  of  them 
says.

The Sicilian lady running the food stall points to wilting salads 
and  tired-looking  sandwiches. ``Everyday I have to  throw  away 
food. There are very few buyers. We thought a Jubilee Year  would 
mean increased income. But its been a big let down.''

The Jubilee has been five years in the making and the Vatican and 
the city of Rome spent huge sums of money refurbishing, building,  
constructing and cleaning. The city's face-lift cost something in 
the region of $2 billions. The returns on investment are  proving 
meagre.

But it is not only for economic reasons that the Jubilee is being 
seen  as a disaster. The Holy Year has put the spotlight  on  the 
Church's   failure   to  effectively  address  issues   such   as 
contraception, homosexuality, divorce, family planning.

``Under  this Pontiff, the Church has practised the  politics  of 
exclusion which goes against the basic tenets of  Christianity,'' 
says   Mr.  Alberto  Melloni,  Professor  of  Religion  at   Rome 
University and author of ``The Election of the Bishop of Rome''. 

``In  many  ways this Pope's reign has been paradoxical.  He  has 
been  a tremendous champion of human rights and was  instrumental 
in  the  downfall  of  communism. But  he  appears  uncaring  and 
indifferent, inflexible on moral issues,'' says Prof. Melloni.

The Pope's ill-health is beginning to cause serious concern.  His 
refusal  to resign or retire so far has reportedly  angered  many 
Cardinals (they are supposed to retire at 75 and the Pope is  now 
76) and the Vatican's intransigence on several issues has created 
the  impression that the Vatican is out of step with  its  flock. 
Observers say the spotlight trained on the Vatican by the Jubilee 
Year  is picking out many of the dissensions which  exist  within 
the church.

``This is a year of renewal. But where is the renewal? The church 
is dated, its political institutions need restructuring. There is 
tremendous  dissension  within  the church  and  the  cracks  are 
beginning to show,'' says Mr. Luigi Accantoli, a commentator.

The  first salvo was fired by Germany's Bishop Karl  Lehmann  who 
suggested  that  the present Pontiff  might  consider  resigning. 
``The Pope is very sick ineed. He does not write his own speeches 
or  sermons  and has to be assisted. Two things can  happen.  The 
Pope  can  be persuaded to resign. Several people feel  that  the 
Pope will resign next June but others fear that he will try to go 
on until the end of the Holy Year. The election of a new Pope  is 
a very complex and complicated affair,'' says Prof. Melloni.

Bishop Lehmann's remarks he feels are a warning to the Curia, the 
Pope's  entourage in Rome, and in particular to Cardinal  Sodano, 
the  Vatican's Secretary of State. Bishop Lehmann has called  for 
the  holding of a General Council and has said he would like  the 
next  Pope  to be Italian. This is indicative of  the  tremendous 
power struggle currently going on behind the scenes.

If  the  Pope  dies in office as many fear he  will  (he  has  so 
closely  identified himself with the Jubilee that chances of  him 
resigning are remote), there is a stipulated period of nine  days 
of  mourning before an election can be held. Those nine days  are 
used  for  intense power- brokering. For the first  two  days  of 
voting  a possible future Pope requires a two-thirds majority  to  
be elected. As of the third round, this majority is reduced to  a 
simple one. 

``This is not desirable. Because a simple majority signifies  the 
conclave  is  not fully behind the Pope,''  says  Prof.  Melloni. 
Several  names are doing the rounds and speculation amid  Vatican 
watchers is high. Bishop Lehmann's message could be seen as being 
addressed to Cardinal Sodano who heads the Curia.

The German preference for a strong Italian Pope underscores fears 
that  Cardinal Sodano would promote the election of a  figurehead 
from Latin America while keeping power firmly in the hands of the 
Curia.
