
Enemies within 


The BJP's allies in the NDA have begun fighting for turf and  are 
sending strong signals that they cannot be taken for granted.  On 
the  other  hand, the Congress(I) is relying on tensions  in  the 
rival  camp,  more  than on its own strengths, to  shore  up  its 
performance.  NEENA VYAS and ANGANA PAREKH, with reports from  K. 
BALCHAND  in  Patna and PRAFULLA DAS in Bhubaneswar,  survey  the 
scene in the run-up to the Assembly elections in four States.

THE  HONEYMOON  is  not exactly over. The many  partners  of  the 
Bharatiya Janata Party still profess undying love for the  master 
of  the National Democratic Alliance, Mr. Atal  Behari  Vajpayee, 
but  at the same time they have begun fighting for turf  and  are 
sending strong signals that they cannot be taken for granted, and 
certainly  that  they may be junior partners of the  NDA  at  the 
Centre,  but must be given the major share of power at the  State 
level.

The  BJP's discourses on ``coalition dharma'' do not  necessarily 
impress  the allies who know that their partnership with the  BJP 
in  the  Central Government enterprise may itself  be  in  danger 
unless they are able to keep their bases in the States. The logic 
of  the situation virtually demands that the allies do not  allow 
the BJP to get too big in the States which they represent.

Take  Haryana.  Mr.  Om Prakash Chautala,  chief  of  the  Indian 
National Lok Dal, was clever enough to realise that sharing power 
with  the  BJP at the Centre would also mean that  at  the  State 
level  he would have to give a piece of the Haryana cake  to  it. 
Mr.  Chautala opted to keep his party out of the  Union  Cabinet. 
And now that Assembly elections are being held, he wants to  make 
sure that his party fights enough seats to have a fair chance  of 
forming  a Government on its own without having to depend on  the 
BJP.

In  Orissa, Mr. Naveen Patnaik's Biju Janata Dal began the  seat- 
sharing talks with the BJP by offering to leave a few crumbs  for 
it  -  just 25 seats in an Assembly of 147. And now  the  BJD  is 
``generously''  offering to ``discuss'' some 22 seats  more.  The 
BJD  has also made it known that Mr. Patnaik should be  projected 
as the Chief Ministerial candidate of the BJD-BJP combine.

But  the main worry for the BJP is the four-way seat  sharing  in 
Bihar  where the nomination process for the first phase  ends  on 
January 24. Ideally it would like a complete understanding on all 
324  seats  to prevent frittering away of the  anti-Laloo  Prasad 
Yadav  votes. But as things look at the moment, it seems that  it 
may not be able to prevent many a ``friendly contest'' among  its 
own allies.

In  Bihar, an intense tussle is also going on in  the  background 
for the Chief Minister's post with the two main contenders  being  
Mr.  Ram Vilas Paswan of the Janata Dal (United) and  Mr.  Nitish 
Kumar of the Samata Party. The fact is that although both of them 
are  Cabinet  Ministers,  as is Mr. Naveen  Patnaik,  they  fancy 
setting up their own fiefdoms in the States.

There  is  no denying that ideally the BJP would like  the  Bihar 
Chief Ministership for its own candidate, except that it does not 
have  individual candidates who can boast of the kind  of  caste-
based  ground  support  that  Mr. Paswan  and  Mr.  Kumar  enjoy. 
Cleverly, the party has ``persuaded'' its allies not to press the 
Chief  Ministerial  issue  now but to leave  it  till  after  the 
election results are available.

No  political party can remain static - it must grow or  it  will 
shrink. The BJP knows this as much as the regional parties  which 
have aligned with it to set up the NDA. The BJP is everywhere but 
most of the allies of the BJP have their base in only one  State. 
And the BJP prefers this, and that was perhaps the reason why  it 
so  vehemently opposed the proposed merger of the  Samata  Party, 
the  Janata Dal (U) and the Lok Shakti, all  erstwhile  socialist 
parties.  It did not want the presence of another outfit  in  the 
NDA which could nurse pretensions to being a ``national'' party.

The  long-drawn-out  seat-sharing talks between the BJP  and  its 
allies witnessed during this round of Assembly elections is  only 
a  beginning. The contradictions were bound to surface sooner  or 
later,  and this round of Assembly elections just 100 days  after 
the Vajpayee Government was installed has provided the occasion.

So  far,  the  BJP  has resisted pressures  from  its  allies  to 
consider giving them a share of seats in States other than  those 
where  they have a base, but this could also become a sore  point 
in  the  future.  In the November 1998  Assembly  elections,  the 
Samata  Party set up candidates in Delhi and demanded and  got  a 
small  share of the Lok Sabha seats in Uttar Pradesh in  1998  as 
well  as  1999. There are signs that the Trinamool  Congress  may 
also be looking to spread outside West Bengal.

There  is  yet another dimension to the problem.  Mr.  Vajpayee's 
main  concern, naturally, is stability of the Government  at  the 
Centre,  but  the  State  units  of  the  BJP  have  a  different 
perspective.

It may be easy for Mr. Vajpayee to step in and resolve the  seat- 
sharing problems with the allies by being a little generous,  but 
that  can only cause problems for the party at the  State  level. 
Already  the Haryana unit of the BJP has let it be known that  it 
would rather fight all the seats independently than accept the 20 
or  25  seats being offered by Mr. Chautala. If the  Haryana  BJP 
cannot  hope  to share power with Mr. Chautala, what  is  in  the 
alliance for the local level leaders? A similar dilemma faces the 
BJP in Orissa.

But  the real problem is Bihar. It is a big State which sends  54 
MPs to the Lok Sabha. Thankfully for the BJP, the spectre of  the  
Rashtriya Janata Dal walking away with the prize still haunts all 
the NDA allies in Bihar. And that is what will finally hold  them 
together.

Banking on rivals

THE  CONGRESS(I)  is viewing next month's Assembly  elections  in 
Orissa,   Bihar,  Haryana  and  Manipur  with  trepidation.   The 
elections, coming on the heels of the Lok Sabha polls, will  once 
more be a test at a time when the battered party leadership would 
rather lie low and recoup. In fact, there is speculation  already 
on  what  the fallout will be for the leadership  of  Mrs.  Sonia 
Gandhi.  More  than its own strengths, the party  is  relying  on 
tensions in the rival camp to shore up its own performance.

As  in the Lok Sabha elections, the party has decided to  play  a 
lone  hand.  Faithfulness to the Pachmarhi Declaration  is  being 
cited; but the Congress(I) really has little choice but to make a 
virtue  out  of necessity. The bulk of the regional  parties  are 
with  the  NDA and the rest, for different reasons, will  not  go 
with the Congress(I).

``Electoral   adjustments''  (as  opposed  to   alliances)   were 
discussed  with the BSP for Haryana, but came to  nothing;  after 
having  severed links with Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav in  Bihar,  the 
Congress(I)  has few options; similarly in Orissa, there  are  no 
non-NDA  parties  with  a  significant  presence  with  whom  the 
Congress(I) can tie up; and in Manipur, it has become a member of 
the  six-party  Secular Democratic Front but even  so  ``friendly 
contests'' are expected in all but 15 of the 60 seats.

Orissa  is the biggest challenge for the Congress(I) since it  is 
in power there. But not even diehard party loyalists are  willing 
to  place odds on the Congress(I) forming the  Government  again. 
Three Chief Ministers have been changed in the span of one  year; 
the State Government's handling of the post-cyclone situation was 
seen   as  unsatisfactory  and  in-fighting  within   the   party 
heightened  that impression; there is serious internal  bickering 
among faction leaders; and of course, the anti-incumbency factor.

There  is  a  contest for being declared  the  Chief  Ministerial 
candidate and recently, the State Congress(I) spokesman announced 
the  name of the Orissa PCC(I) chief, Mr. J. B. Patnaik (who  was 
removed as Chief Minister after the Graham Staines murder).  This 
was  immediately  denied by the AICC(I) in Delhi, which  made  it 
clear  that no Chief Ministerial candidates would be  decided  in 
advance,  but the cat had been very publicly let out of  the  bag 
and this has exacerbated the atmosphere.

The Congress(I) feels it has an outside chance in Orissa if there 
is  a  division in the BJP-Biju Janata Dal camp. And if  the  NDA 
vote is divided by rebel candidates of these two parties, so much 
the better for the Congress(I).

Orissa  may  be  in the spotlight, but it is  Haryana  where  the  
Congress(I) has some prospects. The party was in a good  position 
there  until July last year, when it went through its  disastrous 
seesaw  act  over support to the then Chief Minister,  Mr.  Bansi 
Lal.  Congress(I)  leaders  hope  to  capitalise  on  the   anti-
incumbency  factor  against the Chief Minister,  Mr.  Om  Prakash 
Chautala,  and  exploit the disappointment of  the  powerful  Jat 
community  which is angry over issues such as the hike in  diesel 
prices  and  Mr.  Chautala's failure to fulfil  his  promises  on 
electricity and water supply.

But everything depends on unity within the faction-ridden  party. 
The  new  AICC  general secretary,  Mr.  Motilal  Vora,  recently 
succeeded  in  persuading all four faction leaders -  Mr.  Bhajan 
Lal,  Mr.  Bhupinder  Singh Hooda, Mr.  Virender  Singh  and  Rao 
Inderjit Singh - to attend a meeting together, something that had 
not happened for a long time. Even so, it will be the way tickets 
are  distributed  -  whose candidates get selected  -  that  will 
ultimately determine the level of unity during elections.

In  Bihar,  the Congress(I) has simple ambitions:  to  once  more 
establish  a presence. Having blamed its alliance with Mr.  Laloo 
Yadav's  Rashtriya  Janata Dal for its defeat in  the  Lok  Sabha 
elections,  it  is  up to the Congress(I) now  to  prove  itself. 
Still,  tactical understandings with the RJD at the ground  level 
cannot be ruled out.

The  concentration  is on the 82 Assembly seats  in  the  largely 
tribal  South Bihar, where the Congress(I) feels it still  has  a 
base. The Jharkhand issue should work in the Congress(I)'s favour 
as  the RJD has opposed the creation of a new State and  the  BJP 
had  promised it two years ago but has not delivered. Though  the 
Congress(I) has been negotiating with the Jharkhand Mukti  Morcha 
(Soren  group), an agreement has not yet been finalised.  In  any 
case,  the Congress(I) is hoping that this time around,  anti-BJP 
votes in the Jharkhand area will consolidate in its favour.

Beyond  Jharkhand - in north and central Bihar - the  Congress(I) 
is  aiming  for a consolidation of Muslim votes and  also  hoping 
that  upper castes such as Bhumihars, Rajputs and  Brahmins  will 
turn to the party because the BJP is seen as promoting others.

While  every State will have its own manifesto and local  issues, 
three  have  been  identified  as  ``national''  issues  for  the 
election campaign. The Government's mishandling of the  hijacking 
crisis  (specifically  the  way  the plane  was  not  stopped  at 
Amritsar,  the  release of hardcore terrorists, and  the  Foreign 
Minister,  Mr.  Jaswant  Singh escorting  them  to  Kandahar)  is 
expected to have a universal impact.

The  two  anti-minority  steps taken by the  BJP  Governments  in 
Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh (the former's order allowing Government 
servants  to  take  part  in  RSS  activities  and  the  latter's 
legislation on construction of places of worship) are expected to 
send  a powerful message to minorities and liberals on the  BJP's 
hidden agenda. 
