
The Karmapa case - wheels within wheels 


Ugyen Trinley Dorje's arrival in India appears to have  triggered 
powerful and competing forces whose influence goes far beyond the 
insularity of the Buddhist religious order based in Tibet, writes 
ATUL ANEJA.

FROM  WHAT  initially appeared to be a daring flight of  a  young 
Tibetan  monk from Chinese ``captivity'', the defection of  Ugyen 
Trinley  Dorje,  the  17th  Karmapa,  has  acquired  much  larger 
dimensions. His arrival in the mountains near Dharamsala  appears 
to  have triggered powerful and competing forces whose  influence 
goes  far beyond the insularity of the Buddhist  religious  order 
based  in  Tibet. The arrival of the Lama,  nevertheless,  has  a 
powerful  religious angle as it has precipitated a  bitter  power 
struggle for control over the five-million- strong Kagyu sect  of 
Buddhism. The Kagyu sect has an influential following spread over 
300 monasteries worldwide.

The  Kagyu  sect headed by the Karmapas, in the  past,  had  also 
competed  with  the Dalai Lamas for influence, though  the  power 
struggle  was  seemingly settled around 350 years ago.  Does  the 
arrival  of  the Karmapa therefore threaten the Dalai  Lama,  who 
currently heads the Tibetan ecclesiastical order?

But  more  importantly, the defection of the teenage Lama  has  a 
larger  political  spin-off. His arrival, it  is  apprehended  in 
Government  circles,  could  engender  a  clash  of  geopolitical 
interests  between  China  and India in  the  high  Himalayas  of 
eastern India.

One key question is: was the defection masterminded by a  section 
of  the Tibetan clergy alone or was it a conspiracy by  China  to 
embarrass India if not raise security concerns for it?

According to one view, the 14-year-old monk managed to arrive  in 
India by evading a lax Chinese surveillance machinery.  Advocates 
of  this  view, who do not see a Chinese hand in  the  defection, 
point  out that the escape was possible because he had gone  into 
``retreat''  just  before  fleeing. According  to  the  religious 
practices  of the Kagyu sect, the monk during ``retreat'' can  be 
met only by his tutor. Food also is not brought to him in  person 
but  is pushed into his room. Having secured his  seclusion,  the 
Karmapa planned his escape from the Tsurphu monastery near  Lhasa 
and  trekked into India through the mountains, undetected by  the 
Chinese authorities.

A  section of the Government here dismisses this view, though  it 
is  acknowledged that the Lama indeed had gone  into  ``retreat'' 
last  month. According to sources, the 14-year-old did  not  trek 
into India, but travelled in a vehicle after descending from  the 
third  or  the  fourth floor of the Tsurphu  monastery  where  he 
resided. 

According to them, a single road which is heavily pot-holed leads 
out of the monastery. For some distance, this road runs  parallel 
to  a river. But seven bridges, which are manned round the  clock 
by the Chinese, have to be subsequently crossed before Tibet  can 
be  exited. The teenage Lama's escape without the full  knowledge 
of,  if  not  abetment  by,  the  Chinese  is  therefore   highly 
improbable if not impossible, they say.

Having left Tibet, the Karmapa then supposedly entered Nepal  and 
after  travelling  a long distance in that country  crossed  into 
India somewhere near Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh.

In  case  the Chinese helped in pushing in the Karmapa,  what  is 
Beijing's  larger design vis-a-vis India? Analysts here say  that 
the  presence  of the Karmapa in India  will  naturally  generate 
pressures  for  his  transfer to the sensitive  border  State  of 
Sikkim as the Kagyu sect is headquartered in the Rumtek monastery 
there.

Rumtek  is  not an ordinary monastery. It  houses  the  treasures 
brought  into  India by the 16th Karmapa, who  escaped  with  the 
Dalai  Lama  in  1959.  Besides its  riches,  estimated  at  $1.2 
billions,  the  wealthy monastery houses the ``black  hat'',  the 
symbol  of  final  authority of this sect. It  also  exercises  a 
powerful  influence over the political and economic elite of  the 
border State.

To  assert his undisputed authority over the  five-million-strong 
diaspora  of the Kagyu sect, the 17th Karmapa will have  to  take 
physical control of the ``black hat'' in Rumtek. If this happens, 
it  could  help  China acquire a lever  to  influence  events  in 
Sikkim.  As  it is, China has not accepted Sikkim's  merger  with 
India  in  1975. The Karmapa's installation in Rumtek  will  also 
encourage the to and fro movement of agent provocateurs disguised 
as pilgrims, it is apprehended. The concerns of security planners 
here are enhanced as the State is not far from Arunachal Pradesh, 
whose  status  has also been disputed by China. The  presence  of 
Dorje can therefore affect India's eastern defences.

Not  surprisingly,  powerful  forces  are  pushing  for   Dorje's 
transfer to Rumtek monastery. Its chief advocate so far has  been 
the  U.S.-  educated monk, Tai Situ Rimpoche who resides  in  his 
monastery  in  Beed in Himachal Pradesh. He was one of  the  four 
regents  in charge of selecting the 17th Karmapa after the  death 
of  the  16th in Chicago in 1981. The  Chinese  authorities,  the 
Dalai  Lama and the Tai Situ had accepted Ugyen Trinley Dorje  as 
the  17th Karmapa. The Tai Situ has reportedly met  the  boy-monk 
several  times  since his arrival in India  earlier  this  month. 
Incidentally, the Government of India had reportedly declared Tai 
Situ  persona non grata in August 1994, but the  restriction  was 
subsequently lifted in 1998.

Pressure  for  Dorje's presence in Rumtek is also  being  mounted 
inside  Sikkim.  The  Joint Action Committee(  JAC)  which  is  a  
conglomerate  of  several  Buddhist organisations  in  the  State 
threatens to take the demand for Dorje's presence in the State to 
the  streets.  Representatives of the  Committee  are  reportedly 
travelling  to Delhi to personally appeal to the  Prime  Minister 
for the Karmapa's installation in Rumtek.

China  watchers here are also examining a possible U.S. angle  in 
the  affair.  The  presence of the U.S.  special  coordinator  on 
Tibet, Ms. Judie Taft, at the time of the Karmapa's defection has 
raised  eyebrows  here.  The  Tai  Situ's  reported  links   with 
influential sections in the U.S. is also under scrutiny.

As  the  effort  to  see the 17th  Karmapa  installed  in  Rumtek 
intensifies,  the  fissures within the Kagyu sect are  likely  to 
deepen. Shamarpa Rimpoche, who has an impressive following and is 
also  one  of  the four regents, hotly disputes  the  Tai  Situ's 
claim. From his seat in Kalimpong in the Darjeeling hills he  had 
six years ago declared 17-year-old Thaye Dorje the 17th Karmapa.

Thaye  Dorje, whom he ``discovered'' as the reincarnation of  the 
16th  Karmapa in Bhutan, was enthroned as the 17th Karmapa  in  a 
monastery  in Delhi in 1994. It is apprehended that in  case  the 
Karmapa  issue festers, it can result in street  clashes  between 
the  divided  followers of the Kagyu sect, with an  impact  which 
would echo well beyond Indian borders.

The  presence of Ugyen Trinley Dorje in India has  curiously  put 
the  spotlight  on  the Dalai Lama. In case Dorje  is  a  Chinese 
``plant'',  it  could mean that a future rival  for  the  Tibetan 
spiritual order, however junior, may have been landed right  into 
his  lap.  On the contrary, if the 14-year-old monk's  escape  is 
genuine, and is an act of defiance of the Chinese, the Dalai Lama 
may have won a major battle vis-a-vis Beijing. Analysts point out 
that  in  the  absence  of  Ugyen  Trinley  Dorje  -   officially 
recognised  as  the  17th Karmapa by China -  the  legitimacy  of 
Beijing's rule in Tibet, to that extent, gets compromised.
