
Braving the brasshats 


While the last word has certainly not been said on the durability 
of  an emerging democratic ethos in Indonesia, the rumours  of  a 
possible   putsch   by  the  army  have  waned,  writes   P.   S. 
SURYANARAYANA.

WAS  IT  a  prescient pre-emption of  a  possible  military  coup 
against  the democratically-elected President of  Indonesia,  Mr. 
Abdurrahman  Wahid? Or, was it simply a whistle in the dark  that 
served as a wake-up call for the new civilian political elite  in 
South East Asia's largest State? 

Either  way, the warning by the U.S. to the  Indonesian  generals 
against  any  power-grab attempt set the stage for  a  flurry  of 
reality  checks  in Jakarta, despite Mr.  Wahid's  characteristic 
twin  moves  of appreciating Washington's concern  and  asserting 
that Indonesia's politics would remain its own internal matter.

By  this  weekend,  as some key  Indonesian  military  commanders 
pledged their allegiance to Mr. Wahid's civilian  administration, 
the  U.S.  could evidently pat itself on the back for  playing  a 
constructive role in South East Asia as a ``preponderant  power'' 
(scholar Stephen Walt's phrase).

Not long ago, the Clinton Administration had revealed an accurate 
sense   of  anticipation  in  regard  to  the   recent   military 
intervention in Pakistan. Indonesia had of course shown itself to 
be better versed than Pakistan in the past in practising the  art 
of  cohabitation between the military top brass and the  civilian 
elite. 

At  present,  however,  all the Indonesian players  have  so  far 
indicated openly that they would like to regard the armed  forces 
and  the democratically-elected leadership as mutually  exclusive 
institutions  that  should allow the ultimate  authority  of  the 
State to vest in the latter.

While the last word has certainly not been said on the durability 
of  an emerging democratic ethos in Indonesia, the rumours  of  a 
possible putsch by the army waned as a result of a few deft moves 
by  Mr.  Wahid and the circumstantial challenges of  toppling  an 
untested  but  democratically-elected  Government,  if  that  had 
really  been the design of the Indonesian military  establishment 
(TNI).

The latest guessing games in Indonesia began in the context of  a 
bold,  unprecedented, action by a Government-backed human  rights 
panel  on  the alleged atrocities in East Timor. Known  in  local 
parlance as KPP-HAM, this panel, working within the framework  of 
the National Human Rights Commission, took the extraordinary step 
of  interrogating  Gen.  Wiranto,  formerly  the  TNI's   overall 
commander  and  at present the Senior Minister for  Politics  and  
Security Affairs under Mr. Wahid. 

Gen.  Wiranto  was  asked  questions  on  his  alleged  acts   of 
``omission''  as  the TNI chief that had, in  the  panel's  view, 
sparked  or  at least sustained the anti-independence  mayhem  in 
East Timor in September last year. 

Significantly  now,  Mr. Wahid has said that he  would  ask  Gen. 
Wiranto  to  resign  from  the Cabinet if  the  KPP-HAM  were  to 
pronounce  him  a  ``culprit''.  This move  by  Mr.  Wahid  fully 
reflected  Indonesia's popular sentiments at this  time,  despite 
Gen.  Wiranto's  singular  contribution  of  having  acted  in  a 
democracy-friendly  manner in allowing what purists  regarded  as 
that country's first ``genuine'' general election last June.

Mr.  Wahid  chose to put Gen. Wiranto on notice  in  this  manner 
after ordering the TNI to change an outspoken military spokesman, 
Maj. Gen. Sudrajat. No clairvoyance was needed to recognise  that 
the  spokesman was being shifted in the context of his  essay  in 
constitutional  interpretation  to the effect of denying  to  the 
President,  the authentic Supreme Commander of the armed  forces, 
even  a  putative  role  of interfering  in  the  TNI's  internal 
affairs. 

The  TNI,  with its earlier nomenclature of ABRI, had  of  course 
remained until recently an integral part of the Indonesian  power 
structure under the doctrine of ``dwifungsi''. But the  President 
had remained the nominal head of the armed forces even under that 
principle.

At a different level, however, the present Defence Minister,  Mr. 
Juwono Sudarsano, the first civilian to hold the post,  cautioned 
the  new  democrats, some time before the current debate  on  the 
probability  of  a  military coup, against angering  the  TNI  by 
seeking to hound it from the centre stage. 

The  significance of that warning is now being acknowledged in  a 
social  milieu defined by the angst of the avant-garde  democrats 
in  regard  to the suspected human rights violations by  the  TNI 
across  Indonesia in the past and the fears about the  military's 
potential for similar acts in the future.

Beyond these concerns of the past and the present, Indonesia  has 
now come under international scrutiny in terms of ``democracy-war 
theory'',  namely the potential for internal conflicts in  newly-
democratising societies as explained by Stephen Walt and others. 

A counterpoint is that nascent democratisation in a few countries 
in recent years has been free from the kind of violence that  had 
featured  the  earlier advent of dictatorships in  certain  other 
states. 

It  is still too early to judge which of these theories  will  be 
proven right in Indonesia, where the TNI does not enjoy the  kind 
of support that Gen. Pervez Musharraf claims among the people  of  
Pakistan.
