
Feet of clay? 


Mr. Helmut Kohl, who till recently strode the European stage,  is 
caught  in a scandal over party funds which has shaken up  German 
politics. BATUK GATHANI reports.

MR. HELMUT Kohl ruled Germany for 16 years and led the  Christian 
Democratic  Party  (CDU)  for  25.  He  was  the  longest-serving 
Chancellor in the 20th Century and rated the architect of  German 
unification.  Mr.  Kohl also dominated European politics  like  a 
titan. He and the late French President, Francois Mitterrand, are 
widely  regarded as the main creators of the European  Union,  as 
both ruthlessly persevered to consolidate economic and  political 
unification  of the Continent, personified by the launch  of  the 
Euro on January 1, 1999.

But  this  past  week  saw his  otherwise  brilliant  career  and 
impeccable  reputation overshadowed by the scandal  over  funding 
for  his  party.  The  CDU,  main  German  opposition  party,  is 
politically  and  psychologically seriously damaged.  And,  as  a 
result,  the Social Democrats headed by the  present  Chancellor, 
Mr.  Gerhard  Schroeder,  who  only two  months  ago  was  widely 
dismissed as a permanent loser, could slip into a second term  of 
office after the parliamentary elections due in late 2002.

Mr.  Kohl is accused of accepting secret contributions  to  party 
funds  and, more than that, concealing them in undeclared  secret 
bank accounts. The sums involved - so far just over Rs. 4  crores 
- are small by any criterion and as a cynical Indian observer put 
it,  ``peanuts''  by  standards of Indian  corruption.  But,  the 
Germans  are overwhelmed - the conviction so far was  that  their 
democracy  was healthy and honest, despite reservations  in  many 
quarters   about   the  increasingly   warm   relations   between 
politicians  and the business sector. Even the  Social  Democrats 
and  the  Greens,  who  are  increasingly  trying  to  pursue   a 
``business-friendly'' political strategy, have their friends  and 
favourites in the German commercial and banking establishments. 

The  current scandal may take months to resolve and  the  general 
perception  is that at the end of the day, the CDU may  face  the 
prospect  of  paying  heavy fines for  breaking  party  financing 
laws.The former Chancellor is still a popular and  widely-admired 
figure  as  few  Germans seriously believe that Mr.  Kohl  was  a 
direct beneficiary of such illegal private contributions. 

The popular German media has had a field day, portraying a sleazy 
scenario  of spy and mafia movies with rituals of currency  notes 
stuffed  in  suitcases being handed over to politicians  by  arms 
dealers for favours rendered. On Thursday, the person who managed 
finances for the CDU, Mr. Wolfgang Huellen, a 49-year-old  father 
of two sons, hanged himself. The German police are  investigating 
if it was indeed a suicide. 

The  man in the news is Mr. Schreiber, a wily but  friendly  arms 
dealer, described as a ``friendly cash dispenser''. According  to 
media  reports,  Mr.  Schreiber  worked  as  a  German  political 
lobbyist  in the Kohl era and was arrested in Canada five  months 
ago for tax evasion and bribery. So far, the German  authorities' 
efforts  to  extradite him have not been  successful,  since  his 
Canadian   lawyers   claim   their  client   is   a   victim   of 
unsubstantiated  allegations by the German Government. It  is  an 
open secret that prominent CDU politicians have had good contacts 
with Mr. Schreiber.

Mr.  Kohl became a member of the CDU in 1947 and rose  gradually. 
He  was  often  dismissed as little more than  a  seasoned  party 
politician,  who lacked both charisma and panache. But  when  Mr. 
Kohl defeated the brilliant and charismatic Mr. Helmut Schmidt to 
become  Chancellor in 1976, the media and political rivals  alike 
conceded  that to underestimate both his intellect  and  instinct 
was  a  grave error, as the list of those he had  vanquished  was 
long and distinguished. Many are still wondering if it is time to 
write  his political obituary, for the man is both  unpredictable 
and resourceful. 

On  April 3, Mr. Kohl will turn 70 and the CDU has to decide  how 
to celebrate the birthday of the ``once great man''. The party is 
already  scouting  around  to  replace  the  ``old   generation'' 
leadership  which  flourished  under Mr. Kohl. But  some  of  his 
admirers  still  feel  that the ex-Chancellor is  a  valiant  and 
honourable  man  who brilliantly led the CDU for a quarter  of  a 
century. 
