
Amnesty in Algeria 


With  the  masses turning against them, the militants  were  like 
fish  in  a drying pool, KESAVA MENON on the hopes for  peace  in 
Algeria.

ONE  SIGHT that cannot be missed by a visitor motoring  down  the 
winding  streets  of Algiers is the clumps of young  men  hanging 
around  street corners with apparently nothing to do.  Given  the 
ubiquitous presence of footballs these young men perhaps dream of 
becoming  another Zinedine Zidane and taking the soccer world  by 
storm. Even those who are not that ambitious know that ferries to 
Europe ply every day from the bay on the other side of the  hills 
from the city's poorer neighbourhoods. Escape from the reality of 
Algeria,  either in fantasy or physically, might be the  foremost 
thought  in the minds of Algerian youth but the  Government  will 
know that it has truly won hearts and minds when the youth can be 
persuaded to stay.

This  is  likely to be the major challenge  before  the  Algerian 
Government   in   the   immediate   future.   The   idleness   or 
disinterestedness  of the youth is one clear sign that  the  high 
tide  of Islamic militancy is over. If the call of the  militants 
still had some resonance the youth on the street would have  been 
more  sullen,  more menacing. But as early as  April  last  year, 
before  Mr.  Abdelaziz  Bouteflika  became  President,  the  mood 
appeared  to  be one of indifference to politics.  There  was  no 
future  in  militancy  both because the  Government  had  already 
gained  the upper hand and because it was clear by then that  the 
militants really had no ideas about a fulfilling future.

The militants' inability to present any plans for a better future 
for Algeria and the intense brutality of their campaign  provided 
cause  for  alienation. Through their use  of  extreme  violence, 
appeal  to local loyalties and the rural population's  abhorrence 
for  the Algerian security forces, the militant groups were  able 
to sustain themselves in the field. But when quantum of available 
force  made  for the main difference between the  two  sides  the 
better organised institutions of the state were bound to prevail. 
This  war  of  attrition  could,  however,  have  continued   for 
indefinitely longer if the Algerian Government had not been  able 
to  present  the right formula, and at the right time,  to  swing 
popular support (even if marginally) to its side. With the masses 
turning against them, the Algerian militants were like fish in  a 
drying pool.

Soon after becoming President, Mr. Bouteflika presented his  plan 
for ``peace and civic concord''. Its basic element was the  offer 
of a partial or complete amnesty to those militants who laid down 
arms and were believed to have not committed murders and rapes or 
carried out bombings. It was believed that important elements  in 
Algeria's  power  structure  -  the  senior  army  officers   and 
bureaucrats  who  wield power behind the scenes -  were  not  too  
happy  about  Mr.  Bouteflika's plans. But he  appeared  to  have 
finessed them when he called a referendum and won endorsement.

Mr.  Bouteflika  had set a January 13 deadline for  the  militant 
groups to lay down arms. Even when the plans were first announced 
it  was taken as a fair guess that Mr. Bouteflika  was  primarily 
targeting  the Islamic Salvation Army (AIS). This was  the  armed 
wing  of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) which had  fought  and 
almost won the 1992 parliamentary polls till they were  cancelled 
because the Algerian establishment did not want an Islamic  force 
to  take  over.  For the Government, the  AIS  was  a  preferable 
interlocutor from the militants side for several reasons.

Firstly  because with the mass mobilisation that it had  achieved 
till  1991 the FIS could claim linkages with people at large  and 
not  remain  merely  a group of  ideological  die-hards.  As  its 
military  wing, the AIS could at least lay claim to some  popular 
base.  Secondly,  the  FIS and later the AIS  as  well  had  been 
engaged  with  the Government for quite some  time.  Despite  the 
collapse of some tentative understandings arrived at earlier, the 
AIS  had  declared a unilateral cease-fire back in  1998  itself. 
There  was  of  course the catch that the  AIS,  like  the  other 
militant   organisations,  did  not  appear  to   be   completely 
monolithic  but it at least had a leadership willing  to  explore 
the possibilities of a compromise.

Groups  of  AIS fighters began laying down arms  soon  after  the 
peace  and  civic  accord plan was endorsed  in  the  referendum. 
However, the basic core of a few thousand fighters held out  till 
just  a  few  days before the deadline for  the  closure  of  the 
amnesty  offer. They and the Algerian authorities are  understood 
to  have been engaged in negotiations till the last minute,  with 
the  AIS  pressing for a complete amnesty for all  its  fighters. 
Eventually,  on  the  eve of the January  13  deadline,  the  AIS 
declared that it was dissolving itself and within a few hours Mr. 
Bouteflika  was  to  follow by granting an  amnesty  to  all  AIS 
cadres.  Some  of  the  older AIS fighters,  or  those  who  were 
wounded, were allowed to go home while others were made to  fight 
alongside the Government's forces.

Besides  the AIS, another smaller group, the Islamic  League  for 
Preaching  and Combat, was also reported to have availed  of  the 
amnesty offer. It is unclear whether it got the same treatment as 
the  AIS. Two hardline groups, the Armed Islamic Group (GIA)  and 
the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, remain in the  fray. 
The  GIA in particular is understood to have been the main  force 
which  perpetrated the most barbarous incidents during the  nine-
year insurgency. It has perhaps calculated that the amnesty offer 
will make little sense when there are so many who will be  hungry 
for revenge.

As of the moment, the Algerian security forces appear well set to 
liquidate  the hardcore militant bands. The Government,  however, 
has  its task cut out in rehabilitating the militants when  large 
numbers  of  their own personnel have  themselves  been  directly  
affected  by the violence. Beyond these immediate tasks lies  the 
more important one of ensuring that Algeria's youth have a better 
future to look forward to.
