
Walking a tightrope 


While  both  India  and China have so far managed  to  avoid  any 
serious tensions on the Karmapa issue the danger is always  there 
lurking below the surface, says C. RAJA MOHAN.

TIBETAN  DEVELOPMENTS have always had the potential to  rock  the 
boat of Sino-Indian relations over the last five decades. Mindful 
of this, both New Delhi and Beijing have been trying to play down 
the  unexpected  arrival of one of the top religious  leaders  of 
Tibetan Buddhism in India. Both sides have invoked the importance 
of the five principles of peaceful coexistence that should  guide 
the relations between the two nations.

Even  as they remind each other about Panchsheel, both New  Delhi 
and Beijing are aware of the enormous historical baggage on Tibet 
that could easily inflame, if there is a misstep by either side. 

A whole range of highly speculative theories about the arrival of 
the  17th Karmapa are doing the rounds here, including  one  that 
argues  that it could be a conspiracy by Beijing  to  destabilise 
the  Tibetan community and put India in a spot. The  argument  is 
based  on the assumption that it would have been  impossible  for 
the Lama to escape from China and undertake the hazardous journey 
in  the  middle of a cold winter without the  connivance  of  the 
Chinese  authorities at some level. A more simple  and  straight-
forward explanation could be that despite the best efforts of the 
Chinese  Government,  it  has huge problems  with  the  religious 
leadership  in  Tibet and that the escape of the Lama is  just  a 
reflection of that fact.

But  the  Government  of India is determined not  to  rush  to  a 
judgment  on  how  the 14-year-old  Lama,  Ugyen  Trinley  Dorje, 
managed  to travel from China to India via Nepal. Sources in  the 
Ministry of External Affairs say the Government has acted with  a 
``great deal of caution and circumspection'' in responding to the 
arrival  of  the leader of the Kagyu sect  of  Tibetan  Buddhism. 
Sources in the Government say it has not made up its mind on what 
it would do with the third most important religious leader of the 
Tibetan people, and ``will not be stampeded into a decision''  on 
either  granting political asylum or sending him back  to  China. 
The  immediate  focus of the Government is on finding  the  exact 
circumstances  under  which the Karmapa managed  to  travel  from 
China to India.

Beijing has stated that the Karmapa has travelled to India to get 
valuable  heirlooms associated with the leadership of  the  Kagyu 
sect now located at the Rumtek monastery in Sikkim, and that  his 
decision was not meant to ``betray'' his nation.

Transparency on the Chinese part in explaining the  circumstances 
of the Lama's departure could make it immensely easier for  India 
to  prevent the generation of any misperceptions between the  two  
countries.  While  both India and China have so  far  managed  to 
avoid  any  serious tensions on the issue, the danger  is  always 
there lurking just below the surface.

As the cause for greater autonomy for the Tibetan people acquired 
a  higher political profile in the West and the United States  in 
particular,  China is deeply suspicious of any perceived  attempt 
to undermine its sovereignty over Tibet.

India,  on  the other hand, has historic links with  the  Tibetan 
people and has refused to push back refugees so long as they  did 
not  indulge in political activity against China on Indian  soil. 
Given  the  deep divisions among the  various  Tibetan  religious 
sects, and the conflicting claims for the succession of the Kagyu 
leadership   the  Government  is  conscious  of  the   need   for 
sophisticated handling of the situation.

India  is  also  aware that the Karmapa's arrival  is  likely  to 
create  new political tensions in Sikkim, where there is a  large 
following  for the Kagyu sect. That China has not yet  recognised 
the  incorporation  of  Sikkim into India in  1975  adds  another 
dimension to the Lama's arrival in India.
