
ITC to put up hotel in Calcutta 


CHENNAI, JAN. 22. The construction of ITC's first hotel project - 
ITC  Sonar Bangla - was formally flagged off in the city  by  the 
Chief Minister of West Bengal, Mr. Jyoti Basu.

In  the first phase, the hotel will have 250 rooms in  the  super 
deluxe category, with scope for future expansion to meet emerging 
needs.  The  landscaping of the sprawling  gardens  by  Bangkok's 
renowned landscape designers Weerappan P.L.D. Associates, will be 
an important aspect of the hotel. Special focus will be given  to 
plants  of the eastern region. Veterans of resort hotels  in  the 
Far East, they will lay special emphasis on tropical plants,  and 
the  region's natural water bodies. The suites in the hotel  will 
overlook  and  have direct access to  these  especially  designed 
gardens.

The  hotel  is  being  designed  to  cater  to  up-market  global 
travellers  in  the eastern region,  national  and  international 
delegates  participating at conventions in the city, as  well  as 
delegates and visitors to the Science City. Planned specially for 
today's  busy  executives,  the rooms  will  feature  the  latest 
communication infrastructure, as well as extensive banqueting and 
conference  facilities,  meeting rooms,  and  a  state-of-the-art 
business centre. As demand grows with the industrial  development 
of West Bengal and its increasing emergence as the gateway to the 
east,  ITC Sonar Bangla has plans to add more rooms  and  enhance 
the facilities for conferences, says a release.

PTI reports:

Talking  to reporters here at the ground breaking  ceremony,  the 
Chairman  of  ITC,  Mr. Y. C. Deveshwar,  said  the  company  had 
decided  to  attach  ITC  prefix to  all  the  seven  star  hotel 
properties  that  were being developed in  Calcutta,  Mumbai  and 
Delhi to enhance the brand equity of these properties.He said for 
five  star  category  hotels, these would be  renamed  as  Welcom 
hotels,  a  departure  from  the  current  nomenclature  of   the 
Welcomgroup.
