
LTITL looks for buyouts of software firms


By Our Staff Reporter

CHENNAI,  JAN. 22. L&T; Information Technology Limited (LTITL),  a 
wholly-owned  subsidiary of the $2 billion conglomerate Larsen  & 
Toubro  (L  & T), plans to invest nearly $20 million  to  acquire 
software  companies  in  the areas of health  care,  telecom,  e-
commerce  and  financial  services. The  company  is  looking  at 
overseas acquisition.

At  a  press  conference  here,  Mr.  Achyut  S.  Godbole,  Chief 
Executive  of LTILT, said the company was planning to go  for  an 
initial  public offer within a year. LTITL was in the process  of 
working  out  the  modalities.  Its main  thrust  area  would  be 
Internet  related  technology.  The  company  has  tied  up  with 
Samsung,   a  world  leader  in  electronics  and   communication 
products,  for  setting up a Samsung-dedicated centre  (SDC)  for 
offshore development.

Mr.  Godbole  said the centre would come up in Bangalore  and  it 
would work on technologies such as telecom R&D;, mobile IP,  broad 
brand  access  network. Samsung would invest in  environment  and 
hardware, while LTITL would invest in software and man power. The 
development  for  Samsung would be carried out in  the  areas  of 
wireless  communication  and IP networks.  The  Bangalore  centre 
would initially accommodate 40 engineers and would be operational 
by  February.  The extended facility would  house  100  engineers 
along with laboratories and would be operational by June.

He  said  LTITL had already an on-going ODC for  Hitachi  Limited 
with over 100 software professionals working exclusively for  the 
electronics  giant.  It had facilitated clients to  move  up  the 
value  chain  by delivering single-to-multiple  turnkey  projects 
from  onsite/ offshore, right through to setting up of  dedicated 
ODCs for strategic long-term relationships.

Mr. Byung Chang Kang , Director, Data Network Business,  Samsung, 
said   keeping  pace  with  the  latest  trends  in   information 
technology,  Samsung had also made a foray into  the  information 
and telecom arena with a view to facilitating Internet  business, 
manage on-line services and build system integration.
