
Inventory disposal over Internet


By Our Special Correspondent

BANGALORE, JAN. 22. The build up of inventories and capital goods 
is  inevitable in any manufacturing system. Most of  these  goods 
are  in excellent condition and, in many cases, the items are  in 
virgin  unpacked  condition,  but cannot be used  due  to  design 
changes,  upgradation  of plant and machinery or  simply  due  to 
excess stocks being ordered.

The  traditional  method of liquidating such inventories  was  to 
advertise  in the print media, call for quotations and then  make 
sale decisions. This method was tedious, long-drawn and often the 
company did not realise the best prices.

The  advent  of the Internet has changed all that.  A  Bangalore-
based  IT company, MatexNet Pvt. Ltd., has put up  an  e-commerce 
portal  on the web, MatexNet.com for listing the  inventories  of 
corporate  members and facilitating their liquidation. The  large 
reach of the Internet ensures a vast audience and the  technology 
of  the  net  enables quick  response  and  speedy  transactions. 
Moreover, it is simple to keep updating the content and  classify 
it. As an added service, MatexNet also keeps its clients  updated 
on  the day-to-day market trends, materials exchange  rates,  and 
main  metallic info. Manufacturer's Portal has been a  great  hit 
with Indian companies because it brings transparency,  efficiency 
and  speed into the process of inventory disposal. The  company's 
client  list  includes over 120 blue chip clients  such  as  ABB, 
MICO,  Greaves,  Fuller,  HM  and  TVS  who  have  signed  annual 
contracts  with the company. The latest to join is  Bharat  Heavy 
Electricals, which has signed a three-year contract with MatexNet 
for use of the portal.

MatexNet.com  has now nearly 200,000 items on the site valued  at 
around  Rs. 300 crores. The listings are growing at 4 per cent  a 
month.  On the buy side, the company has developed  relationships 
with over 2,000 small and medium enterprises. The trading  volume 
on the site has crossed Rs. 9 crores.
