
SHCIL launches Internet trading facility 


NEW  DELHI, JAN. 22. Stock Holding Corporation of  India  (SHCIL) 
has  launched  a software product that would allow  investors  to 
conduct  all  stock  market operations  including  cash  payments 
through  the  Internet.  The  product  named  `Stockdirect'   and 
launched in the capital by SHCIL along with State Bank of Patiala 
(SBP),  would bring the investor's bank, broker,  stock  exchange 
and depository participants under one roof, managing director and 
CEO of SHCIL, Mr. B. Virupaksha Goud, told reporters here.

Investors,  who  do  not have access to  personal  computers  and 
Internet  connection,  could avail themselves  of  this  facility 
using  the request transmitting machine (RTM) installed in  SBP's 
premises, the SBP's Managing Director, Mr. A. K. Batra, said.

``As  Stockdirect  brings a lot of convenience to  investors,  it 
will bring the share market to investors' pocket," he said.

Mr.  Goud  said SHCIL has received special  permission  from  the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India to use the facility though 
the Government has yet to approve trading through the Internet.

SHCIL   has   tied  up  with  Corporation  Bank   to   facilitate 
`Stockdirect' transaction in Mumbai and it would also tie up with 
other banks to offer the services in other parts of the  country. 
"We are in advanced stages of negotiation with Bank of Madura  to 
offer  the  service  in Chennai," Mr. Goud  said.  SHCIL  is  the 
country's  largest custodian of shares with the last year  seeing 
the company holding assets worth over Rs. 900 crores.

Mr.  Goud  said SHCIL was planning to launch a slew  of  products 
during  the next few months for attracting retail investors  into 
their fold.

``There  is  a  perception that SHCIL is  catering  only  to  big 
institutional  players. We are planning to launch three  to  four 
products to attract small investors," Mr. Goud said.

The  new  products included `sell and share'  and  `purchase  and 
settle',  which  would  have added facilities  such  as  allowing 
investors to do squaring off transactions also, he said.

The  'Stockdirect'  scheme would only  facilitate  delivery-based 
transactions,  for  which SHCIL has tied up with a  total  of  18 
brokers  in  the  National Stock Exchange and  the  Bombay  Stock 
bourse.

The company will also launch a product facilitating new  entrants 
in  the  insurance  sector  to sell  their  schemes  through  the 
Internet.

From  just  four  offices in 1997, SHCIL has now  offices  in  76  
different  places across the country, Mr. Goud said, adding  that 
the  corporation  would open another 100 offices in the  next  12 
months.  Before  this fiscal-end, SHCIL planned to open  24  more 
offices, he said.

The company has also decided to do away with custody charges  for 
shares  worth up to Rs. 1 crore to attract more small  investors. 
About  90  per cent of SHCIL deals came from  this  category,  he 
said.

SHCIL has revenue of over Rs. 73,000 crores this year as compared 
to Rs. 28,000 crores in 1998-99. Revenue from the retail  segment 
itself  has crossed Rs. 28,000 crores during this year, Mr.  Goud 
said. 

- PTI
