
Molik's power-play boomerangs against Hingis 


By Nirmal Shekar

MELBOURNE, JAN. 22. It is quite likely that Alicia Molik, a 6  ft 
tall teenager from this city, will sit up in her bed tonight  and 
wonder  if she allowed herself to be used on her  country's  most 
famous tennis stage, the Rod Laver Arena.

But,  then, for an up-and-coming young women in tennis, that -  a 
sense  of having been used - is a familiar feeling after  a  duel 
with the numero uno in their sport.

For,  when you are inexperienced and you have the uneviable  task 
of  having  to  face Martina Hingis in a  Grand  Slam  tournament 
match, you don't need to worry so much about the weapons of  kill 
that  your famous opponent might bring to court as about  how  to 
protect your own ammunition from being snatched away by the Swiss 
Miss.

It's  not as if Hingis coaxes or even,  metaphorically  speaking, 
forces  them  at gunpoint to dig their own graves. On  the  other 
hand, she does all the digging - courtesy the opponents' tools.

The world champion is, simply, the smartest tennis player around, 
something that Molik found out today as Hingis beat her 6-2,  6-3 
in the third round.

On  a day when intermittent showers prevented play for  the  most 
part  on the outside courts, Hingis, playing a good part  of  her 
match  under  the closed roof at the Rod Laver  Arena,  gave  yet 
another demonstration of her tactical brilliance.

Molik  owns one of the biggest serves in the women's game  -  she 
consistently  serves at 180k-plus - something that many  top  men 
might  be proud to possess. And from the back of the  court,  the 
Melbourne  teenager  hits  the  ball as hard  as  anyone  in  the 
business.

But,  Miss  Hingis  made a meal of all that,  with  a  perpetual, 
sardonic  smile on her face, just so her opponent  realised  what 
she  was  into.  She used the speed of  Molik's  serves  and  her 
groundstrokes to hit some amazing return winners and passes. 

The faster the serve, the more lethal was the return. The  bigger 
the Molik forehand, the less likely that the Australian would get 
anywhere near the Hingis pass.

``With  Martina, you always expect a better ball to come back  at 
you and that extra bit of pressure threw me off a little,''  said 
Molik, who lost for the second time in two weeks - she was beaten 
by Hingis last week at Sydney - to the world champion.

In a game that features such big hitting players as the  Williams 
sisters and Davenport at the top, and ones like Molik herself  in 
the  middle  and  lower rungs, Hingis is no more  than  a  middle 
weight player.

But,  time  after  time in the last few  years,  the  wonderfully 
resourceful  Hingis has proved that a smart,  athletic,  thinking 
player can stand up to the power hitters and come out on top. She 
has turned counter-punching into a fine art.

This apart, there is a lot more variety to Hingis's game compared 
to  the  same time last year when she completed  a  hat-trick  of 
victories  here.  Sensing  that the courts  this  year  are  much 
faster,  she has ventured up quite often and showed that she  was 
no slouch at the net. And she is a much better server too, with a 
lot more variations on the second serve.

Asked if she was concerned that the spotlight was on players such 
as Kournikova, Philippoussis and Hewitt, rather than on her, this 
week,  Hingis  said,  ``Who holds the trophy in the  end  is  the 
person  who'll be spoken about most. My smile is the last one,  I 
am waiting for that.''

Indeed,  this prodigiously gifted teenager almost always has  the 
last laugh.

Meanwhile,  the  man who had the last laugh a year  ago,  Yevgeny 
Kafelnikov, seems to have sensed his chance to make a decent  job 
of his title defence here this fortnight. 

The  unpredictable  Russian was not in the best of  form  earlier 
this week, but today he played the best he has in a long time  as 
he disposed of Stefan Koubek of Austria 6-3, 6-3, 6-4 to make the 
fourth round.

``When  I saw the draw, I had so much relief. I saw Pete  Sampras 
in  the  top half...with all the guys with the big game  who  can 
trouble  me,'' said Kafelnikov. ``Then I started to realise  this 
is  my chance to play a successful tournament once again,''  said 
the  man who, on receiving the trophy here last year,  had  said, 
``Thanks Pete (Sampras) for not being here.''

Kafelnikov,  the  only  top player not to  have  a  contract  for 
clothes  and  racquet  (``I  am  making  enough  money,  so   why 
bother.''), broke Koubek's serve twice in the first set and  once 
each  in  the  second and third sets in a  match  that  strangely 
lacked character.

The left-handed Austrian, who won his first tournament last  year 
in Atlanta, during a season when he climbed from 94 to 46 in  the 
world rankings, made far too many unforced errors, especially  on 
the backhand.

``Believe  me, it was a hard thing for me to win my first  round. 
But since then things have improved. Towards the end I am sure  I  
will  be  much  more  pumped up,''  said  Kafelnikov,  doing  his 
business in the weaker half of the draw which has only two  seeds 
- Magnus Norman of Sweden and Nicolas Kiefer of Germany - left.

Both Kiefer, seeded four, and Norman, seeded 12, posted  straight 
set victories today. Kiefer raced past Karim Alami of Morocco  6-
3,  6-4,  6-2  and  Norman quelled  a  late  fightback  from  his 
experienced  countryman Jonas Bjorkman for a 6- 4, 6-4,  7-6  (8) 
victory.

Paes' cup of woes continue

For Leander Paes, this has not been the best of weeks down under. 
Although  he did win his first Grand Slam singles match in  three 
years, on Monday, since then things have turned rather gloomy.

This evening, Paes, who was upset in the first round of the men's 
doubles  playing alongside Sebastien Lareau of Canada, also  lost 
in the mixed doubles event.

Paes and Lisa Raymond of the United States, who won the Wimbledon 
title last summer and were seeded No. 2 in this tournament,  were 
beaten 7-6 (7), 6-2 by David Adams and Kristie Boogert. Paes  and 
Raymond played well in the close first set, but Adams and Boogert 
gained  in confidence on winning the tiebreak and put on a  burst 
of speed to the finish.

The results (prefix denotes seedings):

Men's  singles  (third round): 4- Nicolas Kiefer (Ger)  bt  Karim 
Alami (Mar) 6-3, 6-4, 6-2; Arnaud Clement (Fra) bt Roger  Federer 
(Swi)  6-1,  6-4, 6-3; 12-Magnus Norman (Swe) bt  Jonas  Bjorkman 
(Swe) 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 (10-8); Christophe Rochus (Bel) bt Max Mirnyi 
(Blr) 3-6, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 (7-2). 

Women's  singles (third round): 1-Martina Hingis (Sui) bt  Alicia 
Molik  (Aus)  6-2,  6-3;  3-Serena  Williams  (U.S.)  bt   Sabine 
Appelmans  (Bel)  6-2,  7-6 (7-2); 12-Sandrine  Testud  (Fra)  bt 
Tamarine Tanasugarn (Tha) 4-6, 7-5, 6-2; 6- Barbara Schett  (Aut) 
bt  Florencia Labat (Arg) 6-1, 6-3; 13-  Arantxa  Sanchez-Vicario 
(Esp)  bt  Bryanne Stewart (Aus) 7-5, 6-1;  10-Conchita  Martinez 
(Esp)  bt Jelena Kostanic (Cro) 6-4, 6-4; 16-  Elena  Likhovtseva 
(Rus)  bt Els Callens (Bel) 5-7, 7-6 (7-5), 6-3; Kristina  Brandi 
(U.S.) bt Ruxandra Dragomir (Rom) 6-4, 7-6 (9-7).
