
Razzaq: subdued and efficient, like the mechanic he is


By G. Viswanath

MELBOURNE,  JAN. 22. They keep coming to feed Pakistan's  cricket 
and fire the imagination of their people. For a couple of decades 
it  has been a demand and supply situation in Pakistan. The  team 
has  often found it impossible to accommodate every  rookie  fast 
bowler found on the streets of Lahore and Karachi and put them in 
the  fast  lane  of international cricket.  Their  selectors  and 
captains have had to pick and choose, leaving those not  included 
to wait in the long queue.

Abdur  Razzaq  is the most recent product  from  Pakistan's  fast 
bowling  assembly line who has made it to the big league and  met 
with success although he is yet to make a mark in the traditional 
form  of  the  game. He was the big force  that  pushed  Pakistan 
toward a 32-run win against India at the Bellerive Oval on Friday 
at a very important phase of the Carlton & United Series.

Razzaq has not been a fairy tale happening to Pakistan's cricket, 
though the present captain handpicked him for a foreign tour more 
than three year's ago. Only two summers ago he was the heart  and 
soul  of Pakistan's campaign in the first under-19 tournament  in 
South  Africa. He bent his back and bowled fast. He  was  perhaps 
carried  away by the hard and fast wickets and bowled  plenty  of 
short balls. The Pakistan team led by Majid Khan's son Bazid, did 
not qualify for the semifinals then.

But  Razzaq had made a tremendous impact. He was a  smart  street 
kid  who  did  not  have to look up to the  MCC  or  Alf  Gover's 
coaching  manuals  and learn to bowl fast. He saw the  two  `Ws', 
Wasim  Akram  and Waqar Younis, as role models  to  emulate.  The 
garage  mechanic  has not looked back ever since he  boarded  the 
train at his native village, Shahdara, changed two trains to show 
his  talent  at a training and selection trial  for  under-19  at 
Lahore. 

When  asked whether Razzaq had come a long way from being a  back 
up  seamer to a match winner, Wasim Akram said, ``He  has  always 
been a match winner for the under-19s and Pakistan `A' teams.  He 
is  such a good listener and performer. He is a fast learner  and 
is now a complete bowler and very matured cricketer.''

Razzaq  is only 20 and to be mentioned as a  ``complete  bowler'' 
must  be a great compliment from a seasoned practitioner  of  the 
art who only the other day at Sydney got his 400th wicket in one-
day Internationals and is 40 odd wickets away from breaking Kapil 
Dev's  record  of  434 wickets in Test cricket.  Imran  Khan  was 
Pakistan's  fast bowler and captain who handpicked Akram  as  his 
successor  soon after he saw him bowl at Khan Mohammad's nets  in 
Lahore.

Handpicked by Akram

In  less  than  two year's time, Akram  has  given  Pakistan  two 
quality  bowlers  in Shoaib Akhtar and Razzaq. What  sets  Razzaq 
apart  from the quartet in Imran, Akram, Waqar Younis and  Akhtar 
is  the glamour aspect which is not of course a priority for  the 
20-year-old  now. He paid his obeisance to his captain on  Friday 
at the press conference saying, ``All my success and game I  have 
earned is because of Akram, after God. I also have confidence  in 
myself,'' said Razzaq, who has won two `Man of the Match'  awards 
in  the C & U series, leads the bowling averages with 12  wickets 
and has scored 110 runs in 88 balls (40 off 38 against  Australia 
and 70 not out off 50 balls against India at Hobart).

Razzaq has not been given a fixed position in the batting  order. 
He pads up whenever Akram tells him. 

``I  think  in  one-day cricket it cannot be  fixed  because  you 
decide according to the situation. It's like horses for  courses. 
And  that's  what  Pakistan has been following in  the  last  two 
years.  As a player, Razzaq is easy to handle for a  captain.  He 
wants  to bat at No. 3 and at No. 6. He is better off batting  at 
No.  6 and he knows what he is doing when he starts  hitting  the 
ball.

``He  is such an easy person to deal with. As a batsman he  knows 
what exactly he is doing. But while bowling he sometimes does not 
know  what the ball is doing. So he comes to me for  advice.  The 
important  thing is, his length and line is more consistent  than 
any  other  Pakistan  bowler now. He is more  like  India's  Ajit 
Agarkar.  He is able to skid the ball, but swings the  ball  more 
than Agarkar. Razzaq is a team man which is very important.''

Razzaq  took for four for 23 against Australia at the `Gabba'  in 
the first match of the tri-series, one for 31 against India,  two 
for 56 against Australia at Sydney and five for 48 at Hobart.  He 
made only nine and six runs in the first two matches, but made an 
explosive 40 against Australia smashing Glenn McGrath for five in 
an over and then played an outstanding innings, an undefeated 70, 
which took Pakistan's score over 250.

In  a time of 12 days Razzaq has put Pakistan in a  positive  and 
upbeat  frame of mind which is quite a far cry from the  mood  it 
was  in when all the spotlight was on Shoaib Akhtar. This is  not 
the  Pakistan side which returned home dejected, whipped  3-0  in 
the Test series. The players are today a happy lot. They  believe 
they  have  quality players to match the Australians  in  one-day 
Internationals. Razzaq who is one in the 15-member team must take 
a big credit for the change in the fortunes for Pakistan. 

``I  am a sportsman and we as professionals believe that  we  are 
not there (in the final) until we qualify. The Indians have  four 
more  games,'' said Akram who is looking forward to outsmart  the 
Australians in their fifth match that will be a day/night game at 
the MCG. 

Having won four matches out of five, Australia leads C & U series 
in points. The home team arrived here this morning without  Glenn 
McGrath, who has taken a one-match leave from the competition  to 
spend a week with his wife and newly born son, James. 

The  tri-series has reached a stage where the third team,  India, 
has to win probably all its four remaining matches to qualify for 
the final.

A  three  way tie can happen only should Australia lose  all  the 
matches  from here, Pakistan beats Australia on Sunday and  India 
wins  the four matches at Adelaide and Perth. There is  also  the 
possibility of India getting even on points with Pakistan leaving 
the second qualifier to be determined by the net run rate. 

But in the present form and position they are in, the Indians are 
likely to finish their tour at Perth itself and return home  from 
there. 

The  teams: Australia (from): Steve Waugh (captain), Mark  Waugh, 
Adam  Gilchrist,  Ricky Ponting, Michael  Bevan,  Damien  Martyn, 
Andrew  Symonds,  Shane Lee, Damien Fleming, Ian  Harvey,  Stuart 
MacGill, Brett Lee. 

Pakistan (from): Wasim Akram (captain), Saeed Anwar, Ijaz  Ahmed, 
Inzamam-ul-Haq, Yousuf Youhana, Moin Khan, Shahid Afridi,  Shoaib 
Akhtar,  Abdur  Razzaq,  Saqlain  Mushtaq,  Shoaib  Malik,  Azhar 
Mahmood, Waqar Younis, Mohammad Wasim, Wajahatullah Wasti.

Umpires: Messrs Darrell Hair and Peter Parker: Match referee: Mr. 
Cammie Smith.

Points position: Australia: Played 5, won 4, lost one, Points  8; 
Pakistan:  played  4, won 3, lost 1, points 6; India:  played  4, 
lost 4, points 0.
