
The modern face of cricket


Three  countries  have transformed modern cricket in one  of  the 
three   aspects  of  the  game.  The  Sri  Lankans  have   remade  
batsmanship,  the Pakistanis have extended the fast bowlers'  art 
and  the  South  Africans  have  invented  a  new  orthodoxy  for 
fielding.  MUKUL KESAVAN on the changing trends.

CRICKET  commentators  associated  orthodoxy  with  science   and 
unorthodox  play  with instinct. So Jayasuriya is all  flair  and 
"eye"  while Mark Waugh is classical perfection: this  delicately 
suggests  that  Jayasuriya is good while he  lasts,  while  Waugh 
lasts because he's good. Commentators are good at explaining  how 
an eccentric back lift gets players out or how an angled bat  can 
induce  an  inner  edge  on to the stumps;  they  are  much  less 
inclined to explain why these eccentricities work for players, or 
why, despite them, they get lots of wickets and tons of runs.

Cricket's  a  game  that is played side-on.  Bat  and  pad  close 
together. Foot to the pitch of the ball. The trouble with cricket 
punditry today is that the maxims of orthodoxy no longer fit  the 
modern  game.  Contemporary  commentators  seem  inadequate  when 
confronted  with  Sanath Jayasuriya or Lance  Klusener  or  Waqar 
Younis because they haven't (with one two hounourable exceptions) 
allowed  for  the revolution that  modern  bats,  sub-continental 
ingenuity  and  the  limited  overs game  have  wrought  in  Test 
cricket.  Shaun  Pollock has a lovely high-arm action.  So  what? 
Younis  has a lovely low-arm action and he's done very  well  for 
himself.  Conventional  cricketing wisdom today is  at  the  same 
stage  that tennis commentary passed through in  the  "Seventies, 
when  the  side-on  address  and  the  low  flat  forehand   were 
considered  the  foundation of good play. Well, Borg  played  the 
high, top-spun forehand, chest-on like a table tennis player  and 
won  Wimbledon  from the baseline. He had to do this  five  times 
before tennis pundits realised that the game had changed.

Batting

Jayasuriya  is  the  most  significant  batsman  in  contemporary 
cricket. He is a hugely successful heretic, the Martin Luther  of 
modern  cricket.  He has made the rules of  orthodox  batsmanship 
(getting to the pitch, getting in line, playing along the  ground 
and  that  holiest of holies, playing with a straight  bat)  seem 
overstated  and dogmatic. Jayasuriya needs to play away from  his 
body because he routinely hits the ball on the up; he plays  with 
his  bat at an angle of 45' because he is not trying to show  the 
whole  face  to the ball. He is precisely trying to hit  with  an 
angled  blade,  and in common with some young batsmen  today,  he 
uses  timing  and hugely powerful forearms to get  elevation  and 
power.  What  is  more, he has done  this  successfully  in  Test 
cricket,  with  a treble 100 against India  and  the  magnificent 
double  century against England which, as much  as  Muralithran's 
bowling,  won  them  the  match. It  was  probably  the  greatest  
attacking innings played in the last decades, played as it was to 
force a result in limited time.

Is  he  exceptional?  Not  really. Take  Shahid  Afridi  or  Adam 
Gilchrist:  they  got  their starts in  the  one-day  game  which 
defined  their methods, but they already have Test  centuries  to 
their  credit.  Both of them can hit straight but they  often  do 
this  with horizontal bats, they drive through cover by  swinging 
straight but with an angled face, and Afridi plays short  pitched 
balls by squaring up and angling the bat so acutely that the ball 
slides through slips. The freedom of the air that one-day cricket 
has brought, and the resulting willingness to loft the ball,  has 
changed  the pull shot. More and more pull shots are hit, not  on 
the  back foot with the ball taken at the top of its bounce,  but 
off  the  front foot without the batsman going back  and  across. 
Batsmen  will  routinely pull balls that are  barely  short-of-a-
length  and they aim the shot at mid-wicket or straighter  rather 
than  square-leg.  Bats  with more  carry,  therefore  a  greater 
likelihood  of clearing the field are partly responsible for  the 
change.

It could be my imagination, but batsmen do not drive on the half-
volley the way they used to. Batsmen like Ganguly prefer to  take 
the balls higher in its bounce when they leave the crease because 
they  are aiming for elevation and power, rather than the  safety 
of  keeping the ball down. And the reason they are aiming  for  a 
six  is that modern bats make lofted shots more likely to go  the 
distance. Observe Tendulkar and Ganguly drive: they nearly always 
drive  on the up. We have got so used to this that the  sight  of 
Devang  Gandhi driving in his debut Test was a bit like  watching 
the  MCC coaching manual come to life. He got right to the  pitch 
to stifle the bounce and ironed the ball along the ground.

The classical batting stance (side-on, feet six inches apart)  is 
no  longer  the rule. Batsmen like  Jayasuriya,  Jacques  Kallis, 
Cronje  and Klusener stand with their feet a yard apart. They  do 
not  go forward or back - they just shift their  weight,  rocking 
onto  the back foot for the cut and pull, or flexing their  front 
leg  to drive and flick. As Boycott acutely observed,  they  play 
like  batters in baseball; if the ball is in the zone, if  it  is 
there or thereabouts, it has to go.

More than modern bats and one-day cricket, the biggest change  in 
contemporary batting has been wrought by fear. Or the absence  of 
fear. Packer changed cricket in many ways: with lights,  coloured 
clothing,  big money and brilliant television coverage, but  most 
of  all he changed it by making helmets respectable. Nothing  has 
altered cricket more than the helmet. The helmet removed the risk 
of  death and unbearable pain. I remember the relief we  felt  in 
the  Sixties  and the Seventies when Chandrasekhar  achieved  his 
prescribed duck and left because now he couldn't be maimed. I can 
hear  Alan  McGilray speaking out of my Philips radio  early  one 
winter morning, describing Madan Lal's retreat towards square leg 
as  Lillee  ran  in.  I can still  remember  the  brave  Mohinder 
Amarnath  walking out in a sola topi, hamstrung by the menace  of  
bouncer.  And  I  can still see Gavaskar,  the  greatest  opening 
batsman  since  the Second World War,  playing  five  consecutive 
short balls from Imran, each one rearing towards his heart,  each 
one  played  down with one hand, the right hand off  the  handle. 
Luckily Imran did his hamstring on the last ball and all of us at 
Kotla  sighed with relief. Not because the Master was not  up  to 
the challenge; nobody played the short ball better, but there was 
always the chance that one would slip through... and we had been 
brought   up  on  Indian  cricket's  gruesome  cautionary   tale: 
Contractor's head and how it cracked when he ducked into one from 
Charlie Griffith.

If,  as a spectator, I have not felt that  vicarious  spit-drying 
fear  in  nearly 20 years, think of how much better  the  batsmen 
must  feel.  I have seen Tendulkar get pinged by Donald  and  the 
ball  ricocheting off the helmet, leaving Tendulkar unhurt.  Fast 
bowlers can still intimidate but they cannot inspire mortal fear. 
With  the  helmet,  the psychological balance  of  power  shifted 
decisively towards the batsman: they now take guard knowing  they 
can be hurt but not killed. That simple truth has liberated them. 
There  are no Brijesh Patels in modern cricket and if there  are, 
they  put on helmets and become Mohammed Azharuddins. Armed  with 
great  new bats, fitter than before, protected by the helmet  and 
coddled  by the bouncer rule, batsmen who would once have  chosen 
discretion, now affect valour.

Bowling

The  conventions of fast bowling have been stood on their  heads. 
The  menace  of the new ball has given way to  the  paradoxes  of 
reverse  swing in the middle overs. Donald comes in first  change 
in the limited overs game, as does Waqar Younis; Imran  routinely 
said that the new ball was wasted on Waqar. Where Lindwall was  a 
great exception, now Pakistani fast bowlers routinely bowl with a 
low arm to inswing their yorkers. The bouncer has been legislated 
into  relative unimportance and reverse inswing has some  of  the 
glamour that was reserved for the "lovely outswinger" of the days 
of Botham and Kapil Dev.

During  an e-mail question-and-answer session on Channel 9,  Mark 
Taylor  was asked why McGrath was designated a fast bowler  while 
Damien Fleming was only granted a fast-medium tag. Was it  speed, 
a  minimum  miles-per-hour  benchmark?  The  question  was  asked 
because  the  speedometer had timed Fleming as  generally  faster 
than  McGrath in the first Test against Pakistan.  Astonishingly, 
Taylor  said  that being fast was more about method  than  speed. 
Bowlers  like Fleming, according to Taylor, depended on  movement 
or  "shape" for wickets whereas men like McGrath concentrated  on 
line,  bounce and aggression. The first part of Taylor's  answer, 
that fast bowlers aren't mainly defined by their speed, is one of 
those  involuntarily  daft  things that all  TV  pundits  end  up 
saying.  What he meant was that most fast bowlers do  not  depend 
mainly on movement for wickets: men like Holding and Marshall all 
bowled  straight,  at the batsman all the time. So  does  Donald. 
These are great fast bowlers. But the Pakistanis have been trying  
to  redefine fast bowling. Men like Waqar, Imran,  Shoaib  Akhtar 
and  Wasim Akram, swing the old ball at tremendous speed.  Oddly, 
they  do  not depend on bounce for wickets: more often  than  not 
they trap batsmen in front or bowl them. And their ball of choice 
is the banana inswinger.

Heresy  of  heresies,  the  great  mantras  of  spin  bowling  as 
exemplified  by  Bedi,  flight and a teasing  good  length,  have 
yielded  to  the  blacker arts of  the  unreadable  delivery  and 
enormous turn. Warne, not a great flighter of the ball, relies on 
his flipper and the obscene turn he gets from the rough.  Kumble, 
well, who knows why he gets wickets, but apart from the fact that 
he  turns his wrist over, its hard to see how he is a spinner  at 
all.  Saqlain  while  slower, depends mainly  on  his  unreadable 
floater for wickets, Muralitharan on prodigious turn, Mushtaq  on 
his googly, Adams on the novelty of his eccentric action.

There  are  no Nadkarnis in modern cricket  and,  tragically,  no 
Bedis  either.  The  foot down the  wicket  and  the  bludgeoning 
crossbat  swipe has accounted for flighted good  length  bowling. 
The  best  left arm orthodox spinner in the world  today  is... 
Daniel Vettori! The two offspinners to command respect depend  on 
a  deformed, double-jointed arm and the mysterious equivalent  of 
an  offspinners  googly. Spinners who toss the  ball  up  without 
being  big  turners of the ball get murdered  by  quite  ordinary 
batsmen. The classic example is Cronje, whose target area is mid-
wicket and whose mainstay is the cowswipe or jhadu-shot played on 
one  knee.  Protected  from  real pace  by  the  helmet  and  the 
limitations  on  bouncers,  mediocrities  like  Cronje  terrorise 
conventional medium pace and spin bowling with cross-bat shots.

The changing game

The  straight bat, the long innings of attrition or  in  defence, 
surviving  the  new  ball, setting out  your  stall  and  playing 
forever,  genuine slow bowlers wheeling their way through  dozens 
of overs, none of these things will disappear from the game,  but 
they are ceasing to define Test cricket and as a result the  game 
is  changing. It is rather like the decline  of  serve-and-volley 
tennis:  it will not become extinct and there will always be  the 
stray Stephen Edberg, but where once first-serve-and-into-the-net 
used to be the staple of the men's tour, now the game is  defined 
by  ground-strokes.  Modern racquets give baseliners  such  power 
that rushing the net has become a low percentage ploy.

It  is  not  a coincidence that there are more  results  in  Test 
matches  of late. This is partly because batsmen carry their  one 
day  idiom into the longer game, partly because  their  defensive 
techniques have deteriorated through neglect, partly as a  result 
of  much  improved fielding (more catches taken,  more  run  outs 
effected),  partly  because glory now decisively belongs  to  the 
swashbuckler  and  the  solid anchor is likely to be  seen  as  a 
stolid  barnacle.  Cricket, even Test cricket, is now  played  to 
force  a result, not to effect a successful holding  action.  The 
strategic draw is becoming obsolete. 

Three  countries are responsible for transforming modern  cricket 
and  conveniently enough, each one has specialised in one of  the 
three aspects of the game. The Sri Lankans led by Jayasuriya have 
remade  modern batsmanship, the Pakistanis through  Imran,  Wasim 
and Waqar have extended the range of the fast bowlers art and the 
South  Africans led by Rhodes have invented a new  orthodoxy  for 
fielding: the sliding, curving stop, the lightning recovery  from 
proneness,  the  javelin  over-arm  throw  from  the  deep,   the 
elevation of point to the pivotal status once enjoyed by cover.

The  exemplary  modern cricketers are Jayasuriya,  Waqar  Younis, 
Shane Warne, Muralitharan and Jonty Rhodes. Wasim Akram,  Donald, 
Tendulkar,   Lara   are   great  players   but   they   are   not 
revolutionaries,  they  have not changed cricket, they  have,  as 
great  players do, taken what suits them from the innovations  of 
the  modern  game.  The foundation of  Tendulkar's  game  may  be 
Bombay's grounding in the basics, but the front-foot pull, the up 
and  over shot that deposits the ball beyond mid-wicket's  ropes, 
and most of all, that one-side skip as he makes room to pulp  the 
ball with the inside-out drive are tributes to modern bat-making, 
the demands of one-day cricket and his genius, not necessarily in 
that order.

Innovation has not uprooted orthodoxy; innovation never does:  it 
is a tincture that colours the game, subtly changing its momentum 
and its rhythm. The most successful team in contemporary  cricket 
is Australia and it is, in many ways, a very old fashioned  team. 
McGrath  is  all  line  and  length  and  bounce,  Fleming  is  a 
regulation  outswing bowler and the batsmen, even the young  ones 
like  Ponting,  cut,  pull and drive out of the  text  book.  The 
Aussies  are a good example of how well the old verities  can  be 
made  to work by a bunch of tough, professional  cricketers.  But 
Australia  have Warne, the most revolutionary slow bowler of  the 
last  quarter-century  and they have Gilchrist  whose  style  and 
success owes everything to the precedent blazed by Jayasuriya and 
the   Sri  Lankan  transformation  of  batsmanship.   Change   is 
everywhere: another five years and even commentators might  trade 
their cliches in for new ones. 
