
Cronje in full flow; 6-wkt win for South Africa


By Ted Corbett 

JOHANNESBURG,  JAN. 22. An orange moon shone over  the  Wanderers 
ground  on Friday night; an event as rare as a free  lunch.  This 
odd omen brought the return to form of the South African  captain 
Hansie  Cronje  who made an undefeated top score of 83  as  South 
Africa  won  by six wickets. A Cronje full of runs is  an  urgent 
need  if  South Africa is to replace Daryll  Cullinan  and  Jonty 
Rhodes  in  the near future and two successive noughts  in  Tests 
were  unwanted signs. On Friday he was man of the match  and  was 
``delighted to get a few runs again.''

When he went to the wicket in the 13th over, his side was 55  for 
three  after  Gary Kirsten, Jacques Kallis and the  nervous  Dale 
Benkenstein  had all gone for 14 in aggregate. Gibbs had  made  a 
fitful start but it required a steady hand to see South Africa to 
victory over Zimbabwe's 226 and Cronje had looked as steady as  a 
sailor on shore-leave throughout five Tests against England.

Once he had steered his way through the 5,000 barrier we saw  the 
full  range  of Cronje shots: deft footwork to  the  spinners,  a 
crashing  pull off seamer Gary Brent, regular placements on  both 
sides  of the wicket. Gibbs stopped his hit-and-miss strokes  and 
watched  his chief demonstrate what he had learnt in 173  matches 
as he completed his 35th fifty. 

South  Africa  had 98 after 20 overs, 150 in 30 - from  a  Gibbs' 
straight six off Andy Whittall - and forced Andy Flower to spread 
his fielders as far as he could by law. Nothing could stop Cronje 
and  Gibbs putting on 104, nor Cronje and Klusener adding 70.  No 
need to feel sorry for Zimbabwe by the way. It conceded 31 extras 
in 30 overs and is clearly in need of more discipline.

``Victory over us was not for the likes of them,'' Sydney Barnes, 
the  great  medium pace bowler, is reported to have said  of  the 
South Africans of the 1890s. Zimbabwe must lose that attitude  or 
it  will certainly not qualify for the final of  this  triangular 
tournament, its minimum ambition here, so they say. 
