
Sydney spectacular 


ON  my only visit to Australia, 11 years ago, I was lucky  enough 
to walk through two of the most sacred of all cricket grounds. My 
ticket  Down  Under  had been paid for by a  bunch  of  political 
scientists  at La Trobe University, in Melbourne. Reaching a  day 
before the conference, I had time to visit the Melbourne  Cricket 
Ground.  That  institution was celebrating its  tercentenary,  as 
part of which a very fine photographic exhibition was on display. 
One saw here portraits of the great cricketers who had played  at 
the MCG. 

It  was  comforting, among all the English, Australian  and  West 
Indian names, to find mention of two of my countrymen, Kumar Shri 
Ranjitsinhji  and  Bhagwat Chandrasekhar. The  exhibition  was  a 
delight, not least because the official guide had  half-a-century 
of  cricket watching behind him. Indeed, his first outing at  the 
MCG had been in 1932-33, when as a eight-year-old boy he  watched 
Bradman  get a first ball duck and then a second innings  century 
against Douglas Jardine's Englishmen.

I had a day or two free after the meeting as well. These I  spent 
in  Adelaide, where my old flatmate from Bangalore  had  settled, 
marrying  a local girl. I wished to see him, of course, but  also 
the Adelaide Oval, that charming ground underneath a wooded hill, 
a  splendid  cathedral overlooking it. I walked  in  through  the 
Clarrie  Grimmett  Gates, across the ground where my  hero  Vijay 
Hazare  had scored 100 in each innings 40 years  previously,  and 
out  through  the  Victor  Richardson  Gates.  I  was  satisfied, 
although the icing on the cake would have been a walk across  the 
turf at Sydney as well. I shall leave that for a future occasion, 
I thought, and returned home to India.

Now  there will not be another time. For the turf at  the  Sydney 
Cricket  Ground  (SCG) is to be completely relaid.  The  mud  and 
grass  dug  up  to be replaced will  be  packaged  in  individual 
containers,  and  sold. One can thus have as one's  own  property 
tufts  of  turf once trod upon by the studded boots  of  Bradman, 
Sobers, Warne, Gavaskar and the like. There will be a long  queue 
of  buyers,  and the tins will be sold out before I next  get  to 
Australia.

The  SCG  is the home of the New Sough Wales  cricket  team.  For 
years,  decades even, the Sheffield Shield was dominated  by  the 
rivalry between New South Wales and Victoria. Then, after Bradman 
moved  from Sydney to Adelaide and Clarrie Grimmett  joined  him, 
the  Shield became, for a time, a three-cornered  contest.  After 
the  Don retired, South Australia returned to being an  also-ran, 
until  its revival, in the Sixties, under the leadership  of  the 
Chappell  brothers. In the Seventies the  hitherto  unfashionable 
State  of  Western  Australia, with  cricketers  such  as  Graham 
McKenzie, Rodney Marsh and Denis Lillee within its ranks, made  a 
strong  bid for supremacy. Later still, the Queensland  of  Allan  
Border, Craig McDermott and Ian Healey started staking its  claim 
to the Sheffield Shield.

Through all this, New South Wales and Victoria have remained  the 
Big  Brothers of Australian cricket. The staggering  strength  of 
New  South  Wales  cricket,  as well  as  the  consistently  high 
standards  the State has maintained, become pretty clear  if  one 
chooses  an  all-time eleven. Who, for instance,  will  open  the 
innings?  One place might be safely assigned to  Victor  Trumper, 
that  saintly character and majestic strokemaker  who  old-timers 
held  to be even greater than Bradman. But who will partner  him? 
His  own  contemporary,  the  skilled  defensive  batsman  Warren 
Bardsley?  Or  that other left-hander, if a more  fortright  one, 
Arthur  Morris?  Or, indeed, an outstanding southpaw of  our  own 
time, Mark Taylor, who was also a brilliant slip fielder to boot?

Against the position of number three we shall mark down the  name 
of D. G. Bradman, and the captaincy to go with it. That was easy, 
but consider now the two remaining batting places. Surely we must 
include   Charlie  Macartney,  the  "Governor   General",   whose 
character is revealed in the compliment he once paid the great S. 
F.  Barnes ("How good is Barnes? Before I went out to bat in  the 
Lord's  Test of 1912 I told my team-mates I would hit the  beggar 
for six. I had to wait until I was 68 before I did so. That's how 
good  he  was.") But can we leave out Dough Walters,  the  Dungog 
Dasher,  maker  of  many Test hundreds and  a  handy  medium-pace 
bowler  besides?  Where  then does that leave  Stan  McCabe,  who 
played  three of the greatest attacking innings in  Test  history 
(at Brisbane in 1932-33, at Johannesburg in 1935-36, and at Trent 
Bridge in 1938 - of the last his captain, Bradman, remarked,  "If 
I  could  bat  like that I would be a proud  man,  Stan")?  Or  a 
certain  Steven Rodger Waugh, bravest of men, never  better  when 
placed  in  a corner, than whom no cricketer has ever  loved  the 
baggy green cap more? Or Archie Jackson, that precociously gifted 
contemporary of the Don who died of tuberculosis at 23? The  list 
might go on, and on - Michael Slater, Mark Waugh, Norman O'Neill, 
Syd Barnes, Syd Gregory...

After   two   most  contentious  places,  number   six   can   be 
uncontroversially  allotted to Keith Ross Miller,  originally  of 
Melbourne, but who came to play for and captain New South  Wales. 
Yet  there  are other greatly gifted all-rounders too.  One,  who 
came  before Miller, was J. M. Gregory, maker of the fastest  100 
in  Test  cricket, also a furiously fast bowler  and  high  class 
first slip. Another, who came after, was Alan Davidson, master of 
swing  and  seam and a brave lower-order batsman,  and  also  the 
finest  fieldsman of his time (and known thus as the  "Claw".)  A 
third,  who bowled at the other end to Miller, was Ray  Lindwall. 
Lindwall is known for his flowing action and mastery of pace  and 
swing - his opponents, always the best judges, reckoned him to be 
finest  new  ball  bowler of his time. He  was  also  a  forceful 
batsman  in  the  lower  middle order, the  scorer  of  two  Test 
hundreds.

Turn now to slow bowlers, and confront again an embarrassment  of  
riches. Make a list, a short list, of the 10 best  wrist-spinners 
who have ever played anywhere, and find that three of them played 
for  New  South Wales. These were Arthur Mailey,  millionaire  of 
spin,  W.  J.  O'Reilly, known with reason as  the  "Tiger",  and 
Richie  Benaud, who, though not as destructive as the other  two, 
was a vastly better batsman and fielder. Not that Sydney has been 
short  of finger spinners either. Indians of my  generation  will 
remember  well the name of Ashley Mallet, who took 28 wickets  on 
an  Australian  tour of this country 30 years ago.  Much  further 
back  in time there was M. A. Noble, an artful  slow-medium  off-
spinner  who  also happened to be a capable  batsman  and  superb 
captain.

The stumper's slot is, I think, a straight toss-up between Hanson 
Carter,  an undertaker by profession who came,  originally,  from 
Yorkshire,  and  the  man who replaced him  for  both  State  and 
country,  W. A. "Bertie" Oldfield. Both could bat  usefully,  and 
both  excelled in keeping to spin. The "pure" fast bowler's  slot 
is  likewise  a  straight  duel - between  two  mean,  moody  and 
batsman-hating  men.  One  is F. R.  Spofforth,  the  Demon,  who 
terrorised  W. G. Grace and lesser Englishmen. The other is  Glen 
McGrath,  possessed of almost equal skill and a fouler tongue  to 
go with it.

My  own  final  choices, based on some knowledge  and  a  certain 
amount  of prejudice, are 1. Arthur Morris 2. Victor  Trumper  3. 
Don  Bradman  (captain)  4. Stan McCabe  5.  Steve  Waugh  (vice-
captain)  6.  Keith Miller 7. Richie Benaud 8.  Ray  Lindwall  9. 
Bertie  Oldfield (wicket-keeper) 10. Bill O'Reilly 11.  Frederick 
Spofforth.

I  am  not a Sydneysider, nor an Australian even.  To  choose  an 
eleven  of this nature must therefore be an act of  blasphemy.  I 
shall seek forgiveness by offering an alternate, New South  Wales 
eleven,  an eleven that might as swiftly annihilate the  best  of 
Victoria  or Queensland or Western Australia. The NSW  Second  XI 
would  read, in batting order: 1. Mark Taylor  (vice-captain)  2. 
Warren  Bardsley 3. Charlie Macartney 4. Archie Jackson  5.  Doug 
Walters 6. M. A. Noble (captain) 7. Jack Gregory 8. Alan Davidson 
9.  Hanson  Carter  (wicket-keeper) 10. Arthur  Mailey  11.  Glen 
McGrath. 

RAMACHANDRA GUHA
