
Kobi Ziv lifts maiden Futures title 


By Kalyan Ashok

BANGALORE,  JAN.  22. Kobi Ziv, who turns 20 on January  25,  can 
begin  his birthday bash early. The unpretentious Israeli  played 
himself  into  form  at the right moment and  his  near  flawless 
display ensured him the maiden Futures title of his career.  Kobi 
weathered  a belated challenge from Viktor Bruthans  of  Slovakia 
and won 6-2, 7-6 (7-4) in the singles final of the  Wearhouse-ITF 
Futures  tennis  championship  at the Century  Club  courts  here 
today.

Buoyed  by  Kobi's  triumph,  his  teammates  Andy  Ram  and  Nir 
Welgreen, who took the court after him, claimed the doubles title 
and  made  it  an Israel's Day. The duo beat  Aisam  Quereshi  of 
Pakistan and Miles Maclagan of Great Britain 2-6, 6-3, 6-4 in  92 
minutes.

For  Kobi, the youngman from Tel Aviv ranked No. 10 at  home  and 
533  in the ITF list, the victory was worth $ 1,300, his  biggest 
pay  check, but more than lucre, the title mattered to him  more. 
``It  is something like winning a Challenger or a Grand Slam  for 
me, it is such a wonderful feeling,'' he said after the triumph.

Bruthans didn't quite match his rival's first serve. Whenever  he 
made  a mess of it, he was in trouble. Bruthans made four  double 
faults and they came at crucial moments. Bruthans did sparkle  in 
the  second  set,  in  which he kindled  the  hopes  of  a  grand 
resurrection  with  his  pugnacious play,  which,  however,  came 
unstuck in the tie-breaker. 

``I  can't be lucky every time. I thought I had a chance  when  I 
saved those two games in the second set and had a couple of break 
points in the 10th game. But I failed to make it. Well that's the 
way it goes. Who would have thought I would be in the final. I am 
quite satisfied with that,'' said the amiable Slav, ranked 574. 

Kobi  had  a  dream  run in the first set as  he  broke  a  shaky 
Bruthans  in  the first and third games, to take a 4-1  lead  and 
wrapped it up at 6-2.

Bruthans was far more confident in the second set. He slowed  the 
pace down and had the edge in the long rallies over his rival. In 
both the games, Bruthans was down at love-40, before he  produced 
some spectacular returns with his patent double-handed back hand. 
In the tenth game, Kobi trailing 4-5 was up against the wall  and 
after leading 40-15, he was forced to deuce five times. He  saved 
two break points in the prolonged game which saw fierce  rallies. 
But  finally, a tired Bruthans virtually stood still and  watched 
Kobi's ace zip past him.

With both holding serves, the set spilled into a tie- breaker and  
Bruthans  began with a double fault. He later tied the scores  at 
3-all, but netting two returns he was at the receiving end.  With 
serve  in  Kobi's  sure  hands at 5-4,  the  end  was  swift  for 
Bruthans,  as Kobi blasted strong first serve to take next  point 
and then slammed a volley winner to seal a memorable triumph.

Srinath pulls out 

The Indian Davis Cupper, Prahlad Srinath, who was the second seed 
here,  will not play in the third Futures championship  scheduled 
to start at Chennai from January 25. Srinath said he was  nursing 
a shoulder injury.

Aisam  Quereshi of Pakistan also will not figure in  the  Chennai 
tournament, as he is returning home for the Pakistan's Davis  Cup 
tie against Hong Kong.

The  Russian  Denis  Golovanov  was  fined  $  100  for   `visual 
obscenity'  in  the semifinal tie against Bruthans  on  Saturday. 
Earlier, Golovanov was warned twice for code violations.

lThe results (finals):

Singles: Kobi Ziv (Israel) bt Viktor Bruthans (Slovakia) 6-2, 7-6 
(7-4).

Doubles:  Andy  Ram and Nir Welgreen (Israel) bt  Aisam  Quereshi 
(Pakistan) and Miles Maclagan (Great Britain) 2-6, 6-3, 6-4.
