
Joyless cinema, listless fare 


There  is no longer any joy in cinema, says  GAUTAMAN  BHASKARAN, 
about  the films featured at the International Film  Festival  in 
Delhi. Most of the directors were intent on featuring the  darker 
sides  of  life. The saving grace was the few  films  which  were 
refreshingly watchable, and of a high quality.

SURELY,  life is not joyless. The human mind and the human  heart 
find peace, happiness and even excitement in the darkest of times 
and in the darkest of crevices. Men and women always seek out  an 
excuse to celebrate, however deep be their grief, however intense 
their suffering.

But cinema seems to have fallen into a black pit, where there  is 
no  pleasure or merriment. At least, that was the case  with  the 
cinema  I saw at the recent International Film Festival of  India 
held  in  New  Delhi. Directors made it a point  to  paint  their 
canvasses with gore and sadism. The unnatural became natural, the 
disgusting  was dressed up to appear almost stylish.  Incest  was 
in.  Men made love to the dead. Women paraded in male attire  and 
innocence and beauty took a hard knock. 

Except  for  a few movies. Majid Majidi came from  Iran  with  an 
exceptional work of art, "The Colour of Paradise". He talks about 
a blind boy, whose father asks God why such tragedy should befall 
him.  The  man's  conscience troubles him in a  moment  of  great 
dilemma  when his son falls into a swollen river. Should he  save 
him?  Should  he  let  him go  ?  Majidi  captures  the  father's 
predicament  excellently  through sheer cinema, and the  way  the 
film  ends  will remain etched in my memory. We  see  the  father 
clutching  his son, whom he finds on the bank later,  and  crying 
almost  hysterically, thinking that he is dead. The camera  moves 
away, and focusses on the boy's hand, which slowly stirs to life. 
"The  Colour of Paradise" stunned me with its remarkable note  of 
hope and colour (there are haunting images of nature's grandeur).

Why was this not the opening film of the Festival ? Shocks  never 
cease. Fernando Perez was given the honour. His Cuban work, "Life 
is to Whistle", is a satirical tale of three immensely  different 
characters  -  a ballerina, a petty thief and  an  assistant  who 
works  in a home for the elderly. It is comic to see  the  dancer 
pledge her excessive sexual urge to God in return for a role  she 
dreams  of. The thief is a laugh; he is obsessed with  the  women 
whose handbags he steals. The assistant is torn between guilt and 
religion,  and  Perez  interprets human follies with  a  dash  of 
humour.  And  this  does make "life" a  "whistle",  although  the 
director  -  who  once  worked with Tomas  Alea  and  was  deeply 
influenced  by him - says that there is something profound  about 
our  existence.  "I sometimes wonder why I live in a  world  like 
this. There is so much of evil and selfishness around".

I do not know about that, but the screen revels in them. Canada's  
"Post  Mortem" (Louis Belanger) says that the end  justifies  the 
means.  So  Linda plunders by the night and plays mother  by  the 
day. She wants to earn quickly to be able to move to the  country 
with her daughter. But her path is barricaded with stranglers and 
necrophiles.

Germany  says  the  same thing with  a  slight  difference.  Nico 
Hoffman's  "Solo  for  Clarinet"  has  a  cop  chasing  a  pretty 
murderer,  and in his infatuation for her, he  destroys  evidence 
and  finally  destroys  her. The movie  is  slick  with  dramatic 
elements to keep you chewing your fingernails.

In  "Numbered" by Tassos Psarras from Greece, a young man  breaks 
into the bank accounts of an industrialist, and makes merry  till 
his   crime  betrays  him.  A  Russian  "Mama"  (courtesy   Denis 
Yestigneev)  takes her big boys on an airplane and asks  them  to 
hijack  it.  Never  mind,  one of them  dies,  and  another  gets 
demented, and Mama herself is jailed. Hunt Hoe gets father-in-law 
Mohan  Agashe to paw his celluloid daughter-in-law,  Nandana  Dev 
Sen, and when the scandal blows up, there is not even regret  and 
repentance  in  "Seducing Maarya". In yet another work,  Om  Puri 
beats  up his screen wife in "East is East" (Damien  O'  Donnell) 
and  acts the tyrant, but at the end of it, there is  nothing  to 
indicate that he has mellowed. There is nothing to suggest why he 
is brutal in the first place.

Kimberly Peirce, the American director of "Boys Don't Cry", tells 
me  that  violence is fine so long as one explains it.  She  does 
that in a story - based on a true incident - that traces the life 
of  a  girl who feels she is a man. When she falls in  love  with 
Lana  (another girl), society gets mad, and the price to be  paid 
is  heavy.  Peirce does admit that there is a fine  line  between 
what  can brutalise an audience, and what can humanise them,  and 
though  I  did  not  quite cherish some of  the  scenes  in  this 
picture, it will be unfair to say that Peirce had not handled the 
subject with some abject sensitivity.

Nadia Tass's "Amy" sits a little more lightly on your  shoulders. 
When little Amy's rock singer father dies in a horrible accident, 
she stops talking. Tass juxtaposes tragedy with some really  good 
comedy:  an  alcoholic terrorises his family, while  a  posse  of 
policemen walk up a hill singing, because Amy, who is lost, hears 
only when someone sings to her ! Call it elective mutism or  what 
you may, "Amy" has the power and punch to tickle and provoke you.

A few more films in the first half of the Festival added feathers 
to   an  otherwise  listless  fare.  Istvan  Szabo's   "Sunshine" 
sparkled.  It is a tale of three generations, each enriching  the 
other  with  its  experience  and  spirituality.  The  director's 
searing  intensity  and the ability to study a character  in  its 
finest  detail  help  him  to  picturise  a  period  with  utmost 
precision.

"Mifune", by Denmark's Soren Kragh-Jacobsen lives up to the Dogma 
95  that  Lars Von Trier and Thomas Vinterberg  formulated.  This  
means  no  artificial props, no  artificial  lighting,  hand-held 
camera  and  so on, and "Mifune" sends its protagonist,  a  newly 
wedded  man,  into  the country to tidy up the  place  after  his 
father's  death. But our hero finds his retarded brother and  the 
prostitute  he  hires  to keep a watch over him quite  a  pie  to 
handle.

Sight  and Sound makes an interesting remark about  "Mifune".  It 
says  : "Mifune's claim to chastity is more a publicity  stunt... 
For, if the manifesto were a critique of Hollywood or of anything 
else,   the   manifesto's   eighth   rule   ("Genre   films   are 
unacceptable")  would  surely  disallow any story  centred  on  a 
whore-with-a-heart-of-gold...  The  arrival  too  soon  of  Dogma 
Lite."   Nonetheless,  "Mifune"  is  refreshing   and   eminently 
watchable,  and  the  Delhi  Festival had  some  others  of  this 
calibre. About them, next week. 

(To be Continued)
