
Resurrection of a patriot? 


When  Uddham Singh assassinated General O'Dwyer for his  role  in 
the  Jallianwala  Bagh  massacre,  some  condemned  him  for  his 
actions,  while others revered him as a hero and  patriot.  RAJNI 
BAKSHI writes on a movie based on the character of a man who made 
a powerful political and historic statement in his time. The film 
also makes us question the contradiction between violence in  the 
pursuit of justice and high ideals.

RAM  MOHAMMED SINGH AZAD. This was once a man's self-given  name, 
his  identity  and his mission. History remembers him  as  Uddham 
Singh   -  revolutionary-assassin  and  martyr  or  mad-man   and 
terrorist.  In  Punjab, this man is revered as  a  folk-hero  and 
patriot. For Uddham Singh was the man who "avenged" the  massacre 
at Jallianwala Bagh. Like Bhagat Singh, Uddham Singh's legacy has 
been claimed by both Indian nationalists and armed separatists in 
Punjab.

A  film  now presents Uddham Singh as a  missionary  of  justice, 
equality  and the brotherhood of different religions.  The  film, 
"Shaheed Uddham Singh: alias Ram Mohammed Singh Azad", is due for 
nation-wide  release  at the end of January.  Interestingly,  the 
film  is  likely to be released around the time that  the  nation 
pays  homage  to  a more universal  martyr,  Mahatma  Gandhi,  on 
January 30.

Both  Shaheed Uddham Singh and Mahatma Gandhi valued their  sense 
of mission more than life itself. Both shared a particular  dream 
of free India. This was a dream of justice for the "last man" and 
a united India based on a brotherhood of all religions.

Here  the  similarity  ended.  Their  methods  and  responses  to 
injustice were drastically different. This film creatively renews 
the  lively  tension between the legacies of two  very  different 
kinds of political beings.

"Shaheed Uddham Singh" is rooted in the view that the violence of 
the  oppressed  is sometimes justified. The makers of  this  film 
have made a valiant attempt to distinguish revolutionary violence 
from  terrorism  which claims innocent lives. This  is  a  tricky 
task.  Should  we support certain assassins  depending  on  their 
motives? Is violence a necessary evil in the pursuit of justice?

In  the  film, the story of Uddham Singh  effectively  begins  at 
Jallianwala Bagh on Baisakhi day in 1919. The 19-year-old boy  is 
shown as a volunteer giving people drinking water at the peaceful 
gathering of over 5,000 men, women and children. People had  come 
to  the enclosed Jallianwala Bagh in defiance of a British  order 
banning assembly.

General Dyer ordered his troops to fire at the crowd. The British 
newspapers  reported about 300 dead, popular memory  records  the  
number at close to 2,000 people.

The order banning assembly had been given by the then Governor of 
Punjab, Sir Michael O'Dwyer. So both Dyer and O'Dwyer were marked 
as the guilty men of Jallianwala Bagh.

The  film portrays young Uddham as being permanently  scarred  by 
the trauma of Jallianwala Bagh. He swore to avenge this  national 
humiliation and build a free India. Over the next 20 years he was 
an activist of the Ghaddar Party, a revolutionary group formed by 
Indians  in the U.S. and Canada. This involvement took him  first 
to the U.S. and then eventually to Britain, in 1933.

Along the way Uddham Singh changed his name to Ram Mohammed Singh 
Azad.  For  now, he said, "to divide me (from my people)  in  the 
name of religion they will have to cut me in pieces."

By  then Dyer had died. Uddham located O'Dwyer and, for a  while, 
became a servant at his house. However, in the film Uddham argues 
that  there  would  be  no point in  simply  killing  O'Dwyer  in 
private.  That would look like the common murder of a  master  by 
his  servant. To serve its political purpose the "execution",  as 
Uddham  saw  it, had to be carried out in public. So in  1940  he 
smuggled  a  pistol into a public meeting  attended  by  O'Dwyer. 
There,  amid hundreds of people, he shot O'Dwyer at  point  blank 
range.

Turning  himself  up to the police, Uddham Singh is  reported  to 
have  said:  "For  full  21 years I have  been  trying  to  wreak 
revenge. I am happy that I have done the job. It was my duty."

These  were  the days when London was being battered by  the  air 
raids of the Nazis. The sensational assassination of a knight  of 
the  realm,  at a public hall a few blocks away  from  Buckingham 
Palace, was an acute embarrassment for the British establishment. 
The  reaction in India was mixed. Subhash Chandra Bose  commended 
Uddham's  action.  Nehru  expressed  regret  and  Mahatma  Gandhi 
categorically condemned the assassination.

The film depicts the Indian National Congress leadership as wimps 
who  could not appreciate Uddham Singh's heroism.  Krishna  Menon 
tried  to  persuade Uddham Singh to plead  insanity.  An  enraged 
Uddham  Singh  declined  to take this plea and  thus  escape  the 
gallows. When the death sentence was finally pronounced he  said: 
"what greater honour could be bestowed upon me than death for the 
sake of my motherland."

Thus  in  Punjab  Uddham Singh became a hero and  martyr  in  the 
tradition  of  Bhagat  Singh. He was executed and  his  body  was 
buried  in Pentonville Jail. Over 30 years later, in 1974,  Giani 
Zail  Singh  had Uddham's remains exhumed and brought  to  India. 
After  being ceremonially carried on a tour through  Punjab,  the 
coffin  was  buried again at the village  Sunam,  Uddham's  birth 
place.

The impetus for this film came partly from the fact that 1999 was 
the  centenary  year  of  Uddham Singh.  Iqbal  Dhillon,  a  film 
producer  in  Punjab,  carried the idea to Raj  Babbar,  who  was 
enthralled  by the possibilities of the project. Babbar, who  has 
himself been associated with the socialist movement, played a key 
role  in  bringing together the team which decided  to  resurrect 
"Ram  Mohammed Singh Azad" more than Uddham Singh. The  hero,  as 
played   by  Raj  Babbar,  emerges  as  a  tough  but   sensitive 
revolutionary  heart-throb. The colourful musical drama  features 
brief  performances by stars like Juhi Chawla,  Shatrughan  Sinha 
and  Amrish Puri. Gurdas Maan appears as a dashing Bhagat  Singh. 
"This  is not a revenge drama" says Chitraarth, director  of  the 
film, "it is a film about opposition to any oppression."

Atul Tiwari, who wrote the script, does not see Uddham Singh as a 
terrorist.  "Disrespect  for  the life  of  uninvolved,  innocent 
people is terrorism" says Tiwari. Uddham Singh and Bhagat  Singh, 
he  adds,  believed in the restricted, focused  use  of  violence 
while  relying  primarily on mass mobilisation of the  people  at 
large.

The  objective of Tiwari's script is to destroy the Uddham  Singh 
myth which feeds the separatist movements of Punjab and  Kashmir. 
This is a hero to strengthen the anti-communal forces who nurture 
the plurality of Indian culture. Thus the emphasis on the  multi-
religious  alias  and the hero's deep commitment to  freedom  and 
egalitarian values.

The  film also changes the image of the generalised  angry  young 
man  which has dominated Hindi cinema for over three decades.  So 
Ram  Mohammed  Singh  Azad is not simply  angry  because  of  his 
personal  trauma. He is shown to be part of a larger movement  to 
creatively  transform  society. He is not a loner  obsessed  with 
bitter vendetta. The film creates a powerful impression of a  man 
making a political and historic statement.

For  those  who  believe that the violence of  the  oppressed  is 
justified,  these are vital distinctions. And the  film  "Shaheed 
Uddham  Singh"  limits itself to this view. So  Mahatma  Gandhi's 
condemnation of the hero is shown as virtually a betrayal.  There 
is  no  place  in the film to question  whether  killing  O'Dwyer 
actually  achieved anything worthwhile. In Uddham  Singh's  life, 
violence was a necessary evil in the pursuit of justice.

This stream of thought and action continues to thrive today.  For 
example, Naxalite groups exercise a commanding presence in  parts 
of Bihar and Andhra Pradesh. Many of them are contemptuous  about 
the  gradual  path of change, involving non-violence  and  civil-
disobedience.  But  it is also true that a  sizeable  segment  of 
social activists engaged in constructive projects today were once 
part  of  the  Naxalite  stream. They  have  chosen  to  forge  a 
different,  non-violent, path to the same goal - justice for  the 
dis-empowered.

The  tussle between these two radically different views  of  life  
and action will continue. The merit of "Shaheed Uddham Singh"  is 
that  it  attempts to explore the psychology and passion  of  one 
approach.  The film's severe limitation is that it cannot  tackle 
the  contradiction  between  the lofty mission  implied  by  "Ram 
Mohammed Singh Azad" and the methods of the man who chose to wear 
this alias as a badge of honour. 
