
Navamsa location procedures 


THOSE with Mesha, Simha or Dhanus as Lagna in the Rasi Chart will 
have  their  Navamsa  Lagna  from Mesha to  Dhanus  read  in  the 
clockwise  direction.  Those with Rishabha, Kanya  or  Makara  as 
Lagna  in  the  Rasi Chart, will have their  Navamsa  Lagna  from 
Makara to Rishabha going clockwise. Those with Mithuna, Thula, or 
Kumbha  Lagna in Rasi Chart, will have the Navamsa Lagna  located 
from  Thula  to  Mithuna  read  clockwise.  People  with  Kataka, 
Vrischika,  or Meena as Lagna in the Rasi Chart will  have  their 
Navamsa Lagna from Kataka to Meena moving clockwise.

Planets  located in the Padas (Quarters) of the group  of  stars, 
Aswini, Rohini, Punarvasu, Makha, Hastha, Visakha, Moola, Sravana 
and Poorvabhadrapada will have their respective Navamsa positions 
from Mesha to Kataka in Navamsa. Planets located in the Padas  of 
Bharani,   Mrigasira,   Pushyami,   Pubba,   Chitta,    Anuradha, 
Poorvashada,  Dhanishta,  and Uttharabhadrapada will  have  their 
respective  Navamsa positions from Simha to  Vrishchika.  Planets 
positioned   in   the  Padas  of  Krithhika,   Arudra,   Aslesha, 
Uttharphalguni,  Swathi, Jyeshta, Uttharashada,  Sathabishak  and 
Revathi will be in positions from Dhanus to Meena in the  Navamsa 
Chart.

Readers  can  themselves  verify the  applicability  of  the  two 
approaches. For example, a location in Aswini 1 will given  Mesha 
in  the  Rasi Chart and the same in Navamsa too.  A  location  in 
Kritthika  2 will give rishabha in the Rasi Chart and  Makara  in 
the Navamsa Chart. 

Queries answered

An  astrologer calculated a good date and time of birth  for  his 
grandchild, and the child was delivered surgically at that  time. 
Can we arrange the future by such pre-fixed time of birth?

B. Madhu, Kannur, Kerala

Even  though  the Lagna (by time of birth) was fixed  in  dvance, 
there  can be no guarantee that all planets would  be  favourably 
placed, and that the sequence of Maha Dasas and their sub-periods 
will be helpful in all the years to come. All we can say is  that 
the little one came to be born as stated in the query, as it  was 
fated  to do so. There are slips of clock-time, calculation,  and 
action to which machines, astrologers, doctors and surgeons,  are 
subject. Where a Caesarean operation is medically advised, it may 
help to fix a time astrologically for Lagna and Lagna Lord to  be 
favourably  located  for  such  a  delivery.  But  it  would   be 
presumptuous and ill-advised to think that the future of a  child 
yet  unborn  can be determined entirely by such  means.  Surgical 
delivery  is  a poor weapon and means againt  the  strong  forces 
governed by the well-established Law of Karma.

* * *

Good date: Thursday, January 27. (Not fit for travel.)
