
Yeoman service 


"OOCHAK - Oochak" - the sound reverberates in the ears; the  time 
is 6 a.m.; I see a huge 10-foot tusker being drawn slowly by  the 
cavady into the Moyar stream for a morning bath - other elephants 
follow, each guided by a cavady. The place is Theppakadu elephant 
camp in Mudumalai.

Founded  in  1926, this camp is home to a number of  elephants  - 
some  of  them rogues and orphans. Considered the best  in  Asia, 
humane  methods  are adopted here for training an  elephant.  The 
mahouts  and  cavadys  working at the camp are  ignorant  of  the 
ankush  (a pointed metal instrument which is used in most of  the 
places for controlling elephants). Only a thin stick is used, for 
prompting  and directing the elephants. These people who live  in 
and  around  the camp know very little of the outside  world  and 
spend their time tending to the camp elephants. Their job  starts 
in  the morning when they take the animals for a bath, and  bring 
them back to the camp for a ration of medicinal food;  thereafter 
the  animals are let loose for grazing at will. In  the  evening, 
they  are given a second quota of medicinal food and  allowed  to 
graze till the following morning; only the adult tuskers are kept 
close to the camp for overnight stay. This exercise,  religiously 
followed, builds a bond of mutual respect and friendship  between 
the  mahout and the animal. There have been many  occasions  when 
such  relationships  have  led to  certain  striking  behavioural 
patterns.  In  one  instance,  a female  elephant  at  the  camp, 
affectionately called Bhama rescued a mahout who was attacked  by 
a  leopard.  After  driving the predator away,  she  carried  the 
unconscious  mahout with her trunk through a distance  of  around 
three kms to the safety of the camp.

Satyan  -  an  orphan  male calf  rescued  from  the  jungles  of 
Sathyamangalam,  is  now a three year old and full  of  mischief. 
This  calf was separated at a tender age, and had to be fed  with 
milk  and kept in a room. Usually, the chances of survival of  an 
orphan  calf are bleak, but with the efforts of the  camp  staff, 
this animal has survived.

The  Makhna (tuskless male), a declared rogue and a  killer,  was 
captured,  using  tranquillizers, from the  forests  adjacent  to 
Mudumalai  in July 1998 in a daring operation by the  Tamil  Nadu 
Forest  personnel. This Makhna frequently raided paddy, ragi  and 
jackfruit  plantations  in and around the forests of  Kerala  and 
Tamil  Nadu and more recently the adjoining villages  of  Gudalur 
Taluk,  terrorising the people. It had killed more than  a  dozen 
people  both from Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Upon capturing,  it  was 
discovered that the Makhna had sustained several gun shot  wounds 
which  probably was the cause for the animal's behaviour. It  was 
treated by a team of veterinary doctors, under the supervision of 
Dr.  V. Krishnamurthy, an honorary wildlife warden and a  retired 
forest veterinary doctor. The Makhna recovered and was taken  out 
of the kraal in February. 

The  camp now has 27 elephants and 23 mahouts headed by  a  range 
officer,  under whom there is one forester, guard and a  watcher. 
The  camp  also has a resident veterinary doctor,  one  livestock 
inspector and two attendants. The working diet for the  elephants 
consists of horse gram, ragi flour, jaggery, coconut and salt; to 
this  is  added  mineral  mix  and  ginger  powder  (for   better 
digestion)  and  given in suitable proportions according  to  the 
age, weight and condition of the animal. Any animal reaching  the 
age  of 58 years is retired from active work and  transferred  to 
another camp and it continues to get a separate diet ration.  The 
camp has 14 captured elephants and 11 born in captivity.

A fully equipped and functional dispensary with a resident doctor 
provides  for  complete  health care. The camp has  a  record  of 
treating  not only trained elephants but also those in the  wild. 
Late last year, at Sirumugai (Mettupalayam), a wild elephant came 
into  contact with an electrified fence and was badly hurt.  This 
animal   was  treated  by  the  resident  doctor  without   using 
tranquillizers.  It  responded  well  and  recovered.  The   camp 
officials saw the animal again after a few months and its  wounds 
had healed.

The elephants at this camp are in very good condition because  of 
the care and attention being given to them. The number of  calves 
born within the camp stand testimony to the healthy condition  of 
the  animals.  The  elephants  are  used  for  various  purposes: 
conservation,  construction  of bridges,  clearing  fallen  trees 
across  roads, clearing weeds in crucial habitat  zones,  chasing 
away  rogue elephants, eco-tourism, protection against raids  and 
for research purposes. Tourists and serious visitors are happy to 
visit  the camp. Several zoo-keepers and elephant  handlers  come 
here to learn the techniques used.

The elephant camp at Theppakadu has been rescuing, rehabilitating 
and  training  wild  elephants.  The  other  camps  situated   in 
neighbouring States should emulate this as an example. Many  more 
such camps are a must for the rehabilitation and preservation  of 
wildlife. 

R. VENKATESWAR
