
TV for the Valley 


THE  Central  Government  is  attempting to  get  its  media  act 
together  in  Kashmir. And summoning in the  process  a  strategy 
different  from  the propaganda harangues of the past.  For  some 
time  now  there  has been a  separate  terrestrial  channel  for 
Kashmir called "Kashir", featuring two hours of the kind of stuff 
Doordarshan  will put out if you tell them to win  hearts.  Overt 
messages  calculated  to  alienate  more  than  endear.  The  new 
strategy  is  to  stop telling them that  India  is  where  their 
loyalties  should lie. It is to assume that Kashmir is a part  of 
India and that Kashmiris wants the same television that the  rest 
of the country does.

"Kashir"  will  now go from running for just two hours to  18  or 
more from Republic Day, telecasting from seven in the morning  to 
late  night. It will begin with its own version of "Good  Morning 
India,  Sehre  Kashir", and then go on to the sort  of  focus  on 
education, business and careers as well as soap operas and  films 
that the rest of the country likes to watch. Afternoon soaps  for 
women,  cookery shows produced by the private channels and  music 
and dance. The difference: 70 per cent of the programming will be 
in the local language, Kashir, and the rest in Hindi and English. 
The  intention  is  to  provide  about  nine  hours  of  original 
programming a day, and then repeat it. 

The  trump card of this newly expanded channel derives  from  the 
fact that there is no cable television in the Valley. People  may 
catch Pakistan Television (PTV) on their TV sets from terrestrial 
transmitters across the Line of Control but cable operators  have 
been  forced  to  close  shop  by  militants.  The  Ministry   of 
Information and Broadcasting has persuaded the satellite channels 
to  do  their patriotic bit by providing software  free  to  this 
channel.  So on four days of the week, the  evening  transmission 
from 7.30 p.m. onwards will carry entertainment from Sony,  Star, 
Zee and UTV, a day for each.

Those who tune in in the valley will be able to see "Tara",  "Hum 
Panch",  "Khana  Khazana",  "Thoda Hai Thoda  Ki  Zaroorat  Hai", 
"Uncensored",  "Shanti" and much else. These will run  in  Hindi, 
but  the  channels  have apparently agreed to  dub  them  in  the 
Kashmiri  language at their own cost. Certainly a better  way  of 
winning  hearts  then turning the dubious propaganda  talents  of 
Doodarshan  loose on them. The slanted stuff will also be  there, 
but  balanced  by a great deal of entertainment. Three  movies  a 
week, with a focus on those shot in the Valley.

The  weekends will belong to Doordarshan and it has a budget  for 
commissioning  programmes which is more than DD News has  at  the 
moment.  It  is roping in the big producers to make  serials  for 
this  channel  which will be carried both terrestrially,  and  on 
satellite. Just in case there are takers for it in Pakistan.  And 
the chosen satellite is not INSAT but a Thaicom transponder  that  
Doordarshan already has on lease.

Some  brains  and  some effort has gone  into  strategising  this 
channel, with officials going there and talking to people in  the 
Valley to assess what kind of programming there was a demand for. 
There  was  considerable demand for programming  of  interest  to 
women.

Around  Rs.  400 crores has been set aside by the  Government  to 
fight a long term media war in Kashmir, with hardware  accounting 
for much of that sum. As for the software, the initial battle  is 
for  audiences. With Doordarshan's other two channels  being  the 
only   other  official  competition  in  the  Valley,   "Kashir", 
bolstered by all that private satellite channel fare, should  not 
do  too  badly. PTV will now have some  competition  in  Kashmir, 
particularly since it has less programming in the local  language 
than  this  channel  will have. Ladakh and  Jammu  will  also  be 
covered with some local programming in their own dialects.

* * * 

There  has never been occasion before to ponder the  implications 
of  fan behaviour. But the suicide (so say the forensic  experts) 
of  Anju  Ilyasi  last fortnight is disturbing  enough  to  merit 
attention.  The  wife  of a television presenter who  has  had  a 
meteoric rise to fame with one programme, takes her life  because 
of her inability to cope with the intrusions into their lives  by 
a male fan.

At  the time of writing, the police have not yet  focussed  their 
attention  on  whether  a  case of abetment  to  suicide  can  be 
registered against the fan whose obsession with Suhaib Ilyasi was 
something  the  latter  could not sufficiently  defuse.  But  the 
behaviour  of  the man called Narender who showered  Ilyasi  with 
gifts, threatened to take his life if they were refused, and  was 
persistent  in  demanding  Ilyasi's  attention  falls  into   the 
category of obsessive compulsive behaviour which TV personalities 
sometimes encounter in their fans.

It is one of the perils of being in show business. Did Ilyasi  do 
anything to aggravate the man's obsession? We do not know  enough 
yet to judge but there is something to be said for the manner  in 
which  he presented the programme called "India's  Most  Wanted". 
This  is  not  the first programme  on  Indian  television  which 
recreated crimes committed but it was certainly the first of  its 
kind.  Ilyasi modelled it on a similar show abroad and brought  a 
highly  personalised, loud and strident style to his  efforts  to 
use  television to get the public to identify criminals at  large 
and  bring them to book. It worked and several cases were  solved 
through leads given to the police by viewers.

If  you saw "India's Most Wanted", it was focussed on  Ilyasi  to 
the point where the sets for his show were barely noticeable.  He 
would  stride on, harangue his viewers, run a recreation  of  the 
crime  not  with  the finesse that "Bhanwar" on  Sony  does,  but  
crudely,  with  a lot of blood and gore, and  then  enjoin  those 
watching  to  help  nab the criminals who were  still  at  large: 
"Together we can and will make a difference!" There was a faintly 
manic  edge to his performance. He consciously eschewed  subtlety 
in  favour of heightening the brutality he was dealing  with.  He 
came across as a man possessed with his mission.

As Akhila Sivdas of the Centre for Advocacy and Research puts it, 
you  can  either  dramatise  crime  or  featurise  it.  "Bhanwar" 
featurises,  "India's  Most  Wanted" dramatised  each  case.  And 
Ilyasi's  own role in delivering criminals into the hands of  the 
law. He would narrate the successes of his viewers in helping  to 
identify  criminals.  It helped to build up a  larger  than  life 
image for himself and his show. In a country starved for  heroes, 
it was guaranteed to yield both a personal fan following and high 
television rating points. Other channels tried to quickly  rustle 
up  similar  docudramas,  hoping to cash in  on  the  success  of 
"India's Most Wanted". Those flopped.

As  a  rule Indians reserve overt fan behaviour  for  film  stars 
rather  than TV personalities. Major TV stars can venture out  in 
public  the way film stars cannot. But TV personalities  who  set 
themselves  up as inquisitors on behalf of the public are  hugely 
popular. Rajat Sharma who ran "Aap Ki Adalat" for some years  and 
had  a faithful fan following encountered some of this  obsessive 
behaviour. A girl in Pakistan used to write long letters in blood 
till he wrote back persuading her not to.

Using  blood is a means of getting attention. Ilyasi's  obsessive 
male  admirer  used his blood liberally as  well.  Another  woman 
managed  to  find her way into almost every studio  audience  for 
"Aap  Ki Adalat", wrote regularly to him of her  obsession,  kept 
track  of his phone numbers and changes of secretaries,  and  got 
into and out of a marriage through her period of infatuation with 
him.

There  are  deep ironies in the Ilyasi case.  Television  induced 
heroism  resulted in personal tragedy. A man who worked  hard  to 
help bring criminals to book found himself bereaved as a  fallout 
of his work and at the centre of police investigation. There  was 
poignant  contrast between the haranguing persona of the  central 
figure  in  "India's Most Wanted" and the crumpled  face  of  the 
stricken young man whom television news cameras were seeking  out 
for  reasons other than his show. He was discovering  that  media 
can build you up and with just as much alacrity take you apart. 

E-mail the writer at sevantininan@vsnl.com

SEVANTI NINAN
