
Reaching out to people 


Vijaya  Kalyan's paintings conjure up an image  of  unadulterated 
civilisation,  clear blue skies, bright cotton-wool-like  clouds, 
undulating  valleys, peace, joy and human beauty. Her  art  means 
bringing  hope to people and giving meaning to life, says  ANJALI 
SIRCAR. 

VIVACIOUS India-born artist, Vijaya Kalyan, now settled in Kenya, 
has  been declared a millennium artist. Her works have gone  into 
the  Netherlands millennium collection through the Nommo  Gallery 
of  Uganda. One of Kenya's most celebrated artists,  Elimo  Njau, 
said  of  Vijaya  Kalyan:  "She represents a  rare  clan  of  new 
generation  artists  who  have crossed  race  barriers  and  have 
appreciated  what is good in other cultures. It is  difficult  to 
come near that mark."

Vijaya Kalyan's paintings, in bright luminous acrylics on canvas, 
conjure  up the image of unadulterated civilisation,  clear  blue 
skies, bright cotton-wool-like clouds, undulating valleys, peace, 
joy  and human beauty. Her art means bringing hope to people  and 
giving  meaning  to life. Her work traverses a wide  spectrum  of 
human endeavours and highlights an entire gamut of themes -  from 
companionship and celebration - to sharing and caring. There  are 
paintings  of  day-to-day life, market gossip  and  even  magical 
forests. "I try to search the hidden treasure in life. I want  to 
capture it for posterity," she said.

Born  1966  in Mumbai, Kalyan was art-oriented from  her  student 
days.  Though  her father cautioned that she would never  make  a 
career  out  of art, she took a five-year diploma course  in  the 
Bandra  School of Art and worked as an art teacher for about  ten 
years,  her last assignment being with the Bhaba Atomic  Research 
Centre,  Mumbai.  In  1991,  she married  Nitin  Kalyan,  an  art 
graduate  from the JJ School of Art, and Director of the  Nairobi 
Creative  Art  Centre, and settled in Kenya. She held  her  first 
exhibition  at  the British Council, Kenya, and  was  an  instant 
success.

Her  art  at  that  point was totally abstract  -  a  mixture  of 
geometrical  patterns,  lines  and  colours.  "I  loved  colours, 
studied their special meanings and which of them would bring  out 
the emotions best in my work. At the same time I felt the need to 
simplify  my  work  and make them  more  easily  understandable." 
Gradually,  she moved towards figuration and her form and  facial 
feature changed significantly. The best part of her figures  were 
the eyes - "eyes which could reach somebody's heart and soul, and 
measure the depths of one's feelings."

The figure work was a mixture of Indian and African  impressions. 
As much as she had seriously studied art in India for ten  years, 
she  toured  the African country extensively,  studying  its  art 
forms,  visiting museums, meeting artists, working with them  and  
trying  to  gain deep insight into the life of  the  people.  She 
focussed  on the mystique of Kenya's pastoral tribe, the  Maasai, 
who she thought represented the best in human qualities that  any 
community  could  embody - freedom, beauty, grace,  serenity  and 
peace  of mind. "I admire the Maasai's spirit of freedom and  the 
ease with which they move from one place to the next. It is  this 
freedom  that has attracted me - I have seen this in India too  - 
women  carrying loaded baskets on their heads without a  care  on 
their faces - perhaps they themselves are not aware of it. I have 
also  painted  the  beautiful people who  inhabit  the  northerly 
deserts of Africa, but I would never trap them into a portraiture 
of  unschooled,  unsophisticated people, for  they  are  Nature's 
children  and possess a culture of their own." And her  love  for 
them  have spilled out on the backdrop of richly blended  colours 
against  which she has outlined the delighted family, mother  and 
child,  the solo nomad in search of his lost herd and the  tribal 
headman  seated  on  the summit of the  hill,  contemplating  the 
limitless horizon.

Her  works  still retain a semi-abstract quality but  what  makes 
them  unique  is  the  technique  that  she  uses  to  achieve  a 
particular  depth through colour and texture for  each  character 
that  she  creates. She usually does not show  a  preference  for 
particular  colours,  unless of course she deliberately  does  so 
like  in the painting "Between the Two Worlds", in which she  has 
used  only two colours - deep red and a cool blue - to  delineate 
the two faces of a figure. The red signifies the material  world, 
and the blue the cosmic world. The human being is caught  between 
the two - neither can he leave the world in which he is born, nor 
does  he  have the courage to enter a world unknown to  him.  The 
material  world  is such that it grows on  him,  encompasses  him 
fully  and absorbs him over the years. The artist says:  "I  have 
tried  in  my meditation to cross over to the other world  -  the 
spiritual  world.  I  close  my  eyes,  meditate  and  feel   the 
vibrations  of places and feelings that are beyond my reach.  But 
something  interferes, something comes in between, and I am  back 
where I am."

Vijaya Kalyan has so technically perfected her work that she  can 
play  with any colour but her unusual use of the black line  with 
which  she  finishes her paintings has made a difference  to  her 
work. During an exhibition in 1993, she was working on a group of 
paintings  and  had left her palette with the black paint  on  it 
with  the intention of giving a finishing touch in  the  morning. 
The  next day, the black paint lay like a deep gash in the  midst 
of  all the other bright colours, and the idea came to  her  that 
she  could  use  the  black line as  a  finishing  point  in  her 
canvases.  "And  now I find that viewers associate  me  with  the 
black line which has given me a different edge by itself. 
Now I can't withdraw from it, it has become like a soul-mate."

Kalyan  is a sensitive artist who feels the hands of  an  unknown 
power in whatever she does. "If I have achieved anything in life, 
it  is because of my deep faith in this power that guides  me.  I 
have also developed this conviction that one has to give a lot to  
life in order to get back something from it. One just cannot take 
away without sharing with others. Then something goes wrong,  and 
life does not work out."

The artist held her exhibition entitled "Impressions" in  Chennai 
on  the  eve  of  the  new millennium  and  has  taken  back  the 
appreciation  from the country in which she was born to the  land 
which she has made her home. She is an artist whose eagerness  to 
give-and-take  builds a bridge between the two coutries. She  has 
widely  exhibited in Africa, U.S. and Netherlands, and  has  been 
honoured  as  a millennium artist for her competent  as  well  as 
soulful work. 

All works are acrylic on canvas.
