
His art has no scale 


Francesco  Clemente,  artist extraordinaire, creates  his  images 
from a personal mythology, the sources being literary and visual. 
By  assimilation,  even gaudy and kitsch become a basis  for  his 
art.  LAKSHMI  VENKATARAMAN profiles the man and  his  works,  on 
display at the Guggenheim Museum, New York.

THE turn of the century was eventful at the Guggenheim Museum  in 
New York with the exhibition "Clemente" covering over 25 years of 
the  career  of Francesco Clemente, one of  the  most  celebrated 
artists  of  the  contemporary scene. His  artistic  language  is 
unique and the exhibition passes through metaphysics, numerology, 
mythology  and  astrology, all of which are  fundamental  to  his 
language. To put it in his words, "I' is the ground of the  show. 
First  you  establish the Self. Then you give up  the  Self  with 
'Unborn', next, you cross a field of transformation ("Bestiary"). 
Then  you are reconciled with your powers ("Conversion to  Her"). 
At  that  point,  you can collect  your  weaponry  ("Amulets  and 
Prayers").  And then everything dissipates into  nothing,  "Sky". 
"Once you begin the journey you never return".

Clemente's  association with Frank Lloyd Wright began in Rome  in 
the early Seventies, when he was an architecture student; and  it 
is only fitting that a retrospective should be held at the museum 
designed by the great architect, who proved that he was way ahead 
of his time and conceived space as a "continuous becoming".

As  one enters the museum, one is confronted by the  tempera  "My 
House"  on  the opposite wall; the bottom half depicts  a  modern 
apartment  and  the spiral staircase at the corner  of  the  room 
leads one to the next floor, which looks like the interior of  an 
Indian cave temple, establishing Clemente's association with  the 
country.  As  the spiral of the Guggenheim unfolds, so  does  the 
chronological journey of Clemente, which now and then  juxtaposes 
and  overlaps the themes. Though the summit "Sky" is  reached  at 
the domed skylight, there are forays to the sides in "Rooms"  and 
"Books, Palimpsests", "Collaborations" in the tower galleries.

"All  the images have the same expressive weight, and I  have  no 
preferred  medium,"  states the artist. The  exhibition  includes 
works  in all mediums and reflect his peripatetic existence  with 
experiences gained in Italy, India and the United States, Michael 
Auping  wrote, "he sees India and New York as offering a kind  of 
helpful  resistance"  and added Clemente, "so I feel  a  lack  of 
affinity, a dislocation that gives me room to work".

"An object is a fragment of a more complicated discourse" and the 
internal fragmentation of his works emerge from his life. Naples, 
where he was born, his travels in Europe when young, his days  in 
Rome  studying  architecture, his experiences in  India  and  his 
empathy  for the Beat culture which made art, music  and  theatre 
accessible to common people, all had a profound influence on him.  
His  interest  in  India went beyond  its  mystical  heritage  to 
include   the  contemporary  scene,  popular  culture   such   as 
billboard,  statuary, relics and books sold at temples and  Hindu 
comic  books; he collaborated a lot with the local  artisans  and 
craftspeople  for  his  own work.  The  intermingling  of  varied 
cultures  in  New York had an invigorating effect on him  and  he 
settled down there with his family in 1981. He quickly integrated 
himself in this new milieu, painted portraits of his new  friends 
and collaborated with Jean-Michel Basquiat and Andy Warhol for  a 
group of works, while also illustrating a collection of poetry by 
Allen  Ginsberg,  which  was only just  beginning  of  many  such 
projects.

The very choice of his subjects - painters, poets and women - for 
his portraits, have a meaning of its own. Often his identity  and 
that of his subject merge as in "Alba and Francesco".

Looking  at  the entire body of work, it is clear  that  Clemente 
creates  his images from a personal mythology, the sources  being 
literary and visual. By a process of assimilation, even gaudy and 
kitsch  become  a basis for his art and  his  collaboration  with 
writers led to a symbiotic relationship where "the painter's line 
and poet's line are one and the same." Perhaps the most rewarding 
collaborative  work  was  with C. T.  Nachiappan  of  Kalakshetra 
Publications,  Chennai,  if  only because both seemed  to  be  of 
similar temperaments; the books produced by the latter, which had 
an otherwordly feel, contributed most to the early recognition of 
Clemente.

His  strength lies in his drawing; his lines are  agile,  tenuous 
and  elegant.  He shunned the fixed identity  and  chose  diverse 
mediums  and styles, often using another person's sensibility  to 
his advantage. He is able to easily exchange materials,  mediums, 
colours,  forms  and backgrounds. "Unborn" (oil on linen)  has  a 
crouching  tiger behind iron bars, looking expectant; within  its 
form is that of a man in deep slumber, contrasting the tension in 
the  animal and the relaxed form of the man - a  balance  between 
the  conscious  and the unconscious, between form  and  formless, 
derived  from  Indian  philosophy. Take  "Perseverance"  (oil  on 
linen) for diversity - the Pantheon, clutched by the man, recalls 
to  mind ancient Rome and the other markings are of  contemporary 
America.

Clemente himself has been the subject of his portraits  beginning 
with "Self-portrait, The First (mixed-media)." None of his  self-
portraits  has been done with the aid of a mirror, but  they  are 
more  psychic  reflections of the self. He painted  a  series  of 
self-portraits  in 1980 and one of them is quite weird.  Whatever 
the  medium,  he  did  not try to  glamorise  himself;  he  often 
distorted  the face, made hatch marks and marks of wounds,  tears 
in the eyes and so on, such as in the watercolour 'I'. 

Other watercolour portaits of self and friends and family came  a 
couple  of years later. Not just their external  appearance,  but 
even their internal psyche came out in this series. But his  most  
recent  self-portrait  known as "Grisaille  Self-portraits,"  are 
minimal  in the use of colour, concentrating more on the  visage; 
the  eyes  are  large, almost protruding,  and  become  the  most 
dominating feature. The intensity in the expression commands  the 
onlooker, and looks inwardly into his self.

It would appear as if he is obsessed with the human body and uses 
it  as  a means for receiving and giving out  experience,  be  it 
sensual  or  intellectual.  This aspect, in  fact,  has  been  an 
inspiration to many a young Indian artist. 

"Rooms"  features  many  frescoes:  the  "Indigo  Room"and   "the 
Fourteen Stations". The "Stations" (oil on canvas) painted during 
nights  in New York do not deal with Christ's passion,  but  they 
attempt  to  express  this  particular  spiritual  journey  as  a 
consequence   of  personal  and   autobiographical   experiences. 
Predominating  colours in these are deep sombre black, blues  and 
reds, reminding one of their nocturnal origin. The imageries  are 
far from the natural world.

"The  Indigo  Room"  is  made up of four  parts:  123  sheets  of 
handmade  Pondicherry  paper dyed in indigo, faintly  drawn  over 
with  sexually  interlocked figures in charcoal  and  stuck  with 
silver  pieces and the small rectangles of paper are joined  with 
handwoven  cotton  strips.  In  the  rather  illusory  sense   of 
meditative calmness, there is an underlying sensuousness. "Books, 
Palimpsests and Collaborations" highlight Clemente's  involvement 
with writers and poets such as Ginsberg and Raymond Foye and  his 
collaborative work; a lot of collaborative work from his  lengthy 
sojourns in India such as the "Francesco Clemete Pinxit" made  in 
the  miniature painting workshops of Jaipur and Orissa and  other 
works  made  in  Chennai along with  painters  of  hoardings  and 
artisans.  The more than 30 Pondicherry pastels are  quite  well-
known.  Chennai, an amalgam of ancient and modern  cultures,  has 
been  of special interest, where he collaborated  with  signboard 
painters,  crafstmen and artisans, where even a calendar  goddess 
or matchbox label became the basis for his creativity.

Clemente gave up architecture, when in Rome, to study art. He met 
Alaba,  a popular Italian theatre personality in Rome  1974;  the 
two came to India in 1976 and stayed on the banks of Yamuna at  a 
Tibetan   refugee  camp,  before  moving  to  Chennai   and   the 
Theosophical  Society; the amazing diversity of  his  experiences 
and  cultures, which he synthesises in his work, runs very  close 
to Theosophy. He said, "I'm interested in art that has no scale." 
He  has painted frescoes in Italy and America, made  woodcuts  in 
Japan,  created  handmade paper Muslim  hangings,  miniatures  in 
India,  numerous drawings, pastels sculptures (tin, lead,  copper 
pieces  like  "Mercury", "Saturn". "The King  and  the  corpse"), 
mosaics,  etchings and photographs. With a sensibility rooted  in 
Neopolitan  culture and Indian aesthetics, his interest lies  not 
only in erotic fantasies and fears or autobiographical  analyses, 
but  also  an enduring one for metaphysical  systems.  His  early 
development  can be linked to Joseph Beuys, Alighiero Boetti  and 
Cy Twombly. He had also done collaborative work with Andy  Warhol  
and  Basquiat on a group of paintings and  drawings.  Maintaining 
the  inwardness  of  India  and the  openness  and  freshness  of 
America, he has made a unique contribution to the art and culture 
of his times. 
