
Pollution is snuffing us out 


In  urban  India,  pollution  control  has  still  to  become  an 
electoral  issue. The culprits - corporate entities  and  sectors 
that  constitute 'important' vote banks - continue to  be  brazen 
even  in  the face of legislation. Given the  fact  that  control 
requires  effective regulation and high investment, a way has  to 
be   found  bypassing  a  sloth-like  bureaucracy   and   rampant 
corruption. Ironically, pollution will help the economy grow even 
while  health problems soar. Will pollution ever  be  controlled, 
asks noted environmentalist ANIL AGARWAL.

WHEN will India be able to control pollution? Not till the middle 
of the 21st Century. So be prepared to leave your children behind 
in  a  living  hell. Unless you are  prepared  to  browbeat  your 
politicians into action.

Many journalists have been asking the question: What will India's 
environment look like in the 21st Century? Since India is already 
one  of  the most polluted countries in the world,  an  important 
question is: Will India ever be able to control pollution and, if 
so, when?

Most of our rivers, especially the smaller ones, are today  toxic 
drains:  Sabarmati,  Bhadar, Yamuna,  Damodar,  Chaliyar,  Betwa, 
Noyyal, Bhawani, to name just a few. Groundwater too, is becoming 
polluted, which is a major source of drinking water - and most of 
it is drunk without any treatment. But let us talk in some detail 
about air pollution.

Air pollution in our cities is also growing by leaps and  bounds. 
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has just released  the 
air  quality data for 1997 for 70 cities and what does  it  show? 
That Shillong is the only town where the air quality in terms  of 
suspended  particulates - the most threatening air  pollutant  in 
Indian cities - was clean round the year and there was no  single 
day either when the air became even moderately polluted.

In  all  the  69 other cities, the air  quality  was  moderately, 
highly  or  critically polluted - terms used and defined  by  the 
CPCB - round the year. In some, the air was moderately poor round 
the year but reached high or critical levels of pollution  during 
certain days in the year. In 33 cities, that is, in about half of 
all  the cities monitored, the air was critically polluted  round 
the year and they had days when the air quality was nothing short 
of disastrous (see Table: Air Quality in Indian cities in  1997). 
Another 40 per cent of the cities had high or moderate levels  of 
pollution round the year but had certain days when the  pollution 
reached critical levels.

It  is often said that Delhi is one of the most polluted  cities. 
And  by implication, people tend to believe that it is  the  most 
polluted  city in the country. But this is not true. While it  is  
indeed  one of the most polluted cities in the world - the  World 
Health  Organisation (WHO) monitors the air quality in  about  20 
cities of the world and Delhi indeed figures high on that list  - 
Delhi is not one of the most polluted cities in India,  according 
to  the data collected by the CPCB. In 1997, the  annual  average 
concentration of total suspended particulate matter in Delhi  was 
339.3  microgrammes per cubic metre (ug/cum) - i.e., Delhi's  air 
was critically polluted round the year. But Surat, Patna, Jharia, 
Faridabad, Kanpur, Agra and Ankleshwar had still higher levels of 
particulate  pollution than Delhi round the year -  ranging  from 
384 ug/cum to 412 ug/cum.

We find the same situation when we compare pollution on the worst 
day  of  the  year. In Delhi, the peak  pollution  reached  1,055 
ug/cum  in 1997. In other words, on that particular day,  Delhi's 
pollution  was nothing short of disastrous. But Kochi reached  an 
astonishing 2,506 ug/cum on the most polluted day. Lucknow  2,339 
ug/cum, Kanpur 1,385 ug/cum, Chandigarh 1,254 ug/cum, Alwar 1,237 
ug/cum,  Patna  1,229,  Agra 1,222 ug/cum  and  Ankleshwar  1,198 
ug/cum.  Udaipur  and Mumbai were close behind  Delhi  with  peak 
concentrations of 1,025 ug/cum and 1,019 ug/cum, respectively.

In  short,  the  picture of air pollution  is  nothing  short  of 
horrendous.  Moreover, this pollution is widespread and  growing. 
And  this  is  the picture when the  quality  of   monitoring  is 
extremely poor.

First,  there  are cities like Varanasi and  Srinagar  whose  air 
quality is not even monitored. Not only is pollution in  Srinagar 
high, there are reports that it is getting high even in Agartala, 
to name just a few such towns.

Second, even in cities where air quality is monitored, the number 
of monitoring stations is very small. Delhi today has only  about 
10  monitoring stations whereas it should have some  60-100.  The 
average  of such a large number of stations could be much  higher 
than what is given today.

Third,  a large number of critical pollutants are not even  being 
monitored.  What pollution control boards monitor in the name  of 
suspended  particulates  is Total  Suspended  Particulate  Matter 
which  hardly  any industrialised country in the  world  monitors 
today. This is because particles which are bigger than 10 microns 
-  that  is,  one-millionth  of a metre  -  in  diameter  do  not 
penetrate  the  respiratory system much. Over a decade  ago  most 
industrialised  countries had switched to measuring only  PM10  - 
that is, particles of or less than 10 microns. There is only  one 
station  in  India - in Delhi - where PM10  monitoring  began  in 
1998. India is way behind and will be so even in the future.  Now 
most  advanced  countries are moving to measuring  PM2.5  because 
particles  of  this  size are  worse than PM10.  Because  of  the 
preponderance  of 2-stroke scooters on our roads,  another  major 
pollutant  in  the urban air is benzene -  potent  cancer-causing 
agent like particles. This is too is not monitored in India.

The  limited  monitoring  that  has  been  done  in  Delhi  shows 
extraordinary   results.   PM10  levels  in  Delhi   reached   an 
astonishing 820 ug/cum - eight times above the specified standard 
and  possibly way beyond anything recorded in any other  city  in 
the  world.  PM10  levels were  worse than the  levels  of  Total 
Suspended Particulate Matter in Delhi when the two were  compared 
with  their specific standards. The few studies done  on  benzene 
levels  in Delhi show that this cancer-causing pollutant  reaches 
even more disastrous levels - well over 100 times the standard.

And what is incredible is that neither the Central Government nor 
any of the State governments has as yet cared to formulate a plan 
to  control  this pollution and bring it  to  acceptable  levels. 
Everyone  is  literally  sleeping. If  anything  is  happening  - 
piecemeal or whatever - it is because of the Supreme Court or the 
High  Courts. The government's record is nothing short  of  being 
pathetic.

So what are we to do with this pollution?

Power plants, industries and vehicles are the biggest sources  of 
pollution. The rate with which vehicular pollution is growing  is 
astonishing.  The  Centre for Science and Environment  has  found 
that between 1975 and 1995 - a period during which the  country's 
economy (Gross Domestic Product or GDP) grew by about 2.5 times - 
the  total  amount of pollutants emitted by vehicles  grew  by  8 
times.  And  since  India  is  just  in  the  nascent  stages  of 
industrialisation,    power    generation,    motorisation    and 
urbanisation, we can be certain that pollution will grow by leaps 
and bounds unless major efforts are made to control it. That  is, 
unless  we very carefully take an environment-friendly  path  for 
industrialisation,    power    generation,    motorisation    and 
urbanisation.

The  question,  therefore,  is: Will we? It  is  always  hard  to 
predict  the  future but if we look at past  trends,  the  simple 
answer  is:  not  for a very long time. Let  us  see  what  world 
history  teaches us. Pollution grew very rapidly in  the  Western 
countries  soon after the economic boom that followed the  Second 
World  War  -  a period during which the  West  created  enormous 
economic  wealth.  By  the late Fifties, the air  and  water  was 
extremely  polluted. The Thames and the Rhine had become  sewers. 
Japan was suffering from an unknown, but horrifying, neurological 
disorder  called  the "Minamata disease". It  was  impossible  to 
breathe  in Tokyo, London or Los Angeles. This led to a  powerful 
environmental  movement  in the Sixties and  which  gained  force 
during the Seventies.

With  environment also becoming an electoral  issue,  governments 
began  to  respond. During the Seventies  and  Eighties,  Western 
governments  did two things. First, they enacted strong laws  and 
enforced them with great discipline and, thus, second, ensured  a 
substantial amount of industrial investment in pollution control. 
As a result of all these efforts, by the mid-Eighties, the Thames 
was  again  beginning to breathe and so were the  waters  of  the  
Stockholm  archipelago. And urban air was also reasonably  clean. 
It  thus took nearly 20 years or one generation - from  the  mid-
Sixties to the mid-Eighties - to bring about the change. And  the 
battle  is still far from won. Western industries  still  produce 
enormous  toxic  wastes. Carbon dioxide emitted  by  their  power 
plants, industries and vehicles is threatening to destablise  the 
world's  climate, and both Japan and the EU are suddenly  finding 
huge  quantities of dioxin - one of the most poisonous  substance 
known - in their environment.

In  India, we are in the same situation that the West was in  the 
Sixties.  The question is: Will we be able to replicate what  the 
West did in one generation? Will India's rivers and cities  begin 
to breathe by the 2020s? The answer is: Very unlikely. For  three 
key reasons which markedly differentiate us from the West.

*  One, pollution control has yet to become an  electoral  issue. 
India's  politicians  have  not shown  any  serious  interest  in 
controlling  pollution. They have no courage to take on  the  big 
polluters - the corporate sector, which too has shown a  singular 
lack  of interest in controlling pollution. The government's  own 
companies and power stations are heavy polluters. And politicians 
do  not want to take on the small polluters either -  the  small-
scale  units  or  the  small  taxiwallahs/   three-wheelerwallahs 
because  they  constitute  important vote  banks.  Therefore  our 
electoral  democracy is proving to be very weak to  confront  the 
scourge of pollution. As a result, India's pollution control laws 
are  not  even worth the piece of paper on which they  have  been 
promulgated.  And it is unlikely that this situation will  change 
in any real sense in the near future.

*  Two,  pollution  control  requires  enormous  discipline   and 
effective   regulation.   Given  the  state  of   political   and 
bureaucratic corruption, it is extremely unlikely that  pollution 
control laws will be enforced with any level of effectiveness.

*  Three,  pollution control will require  heavy  investment  and 
given  the fact that India's per capita income even today is  far 
less than what the Western countries had achieved in the Fifties, 
it is hard to see this investment being made. Unless, of  course, 
the  government carefully searches for  cost-effective  measures, 
takes  the  usually  cheaper  precautionary  measures  than   the 
extremely  expensive  curative measures,  and  insists  that  the 
companies - big or small - have to meet certain minimum standards 
or  face severe penalties. But neither do our politicians nor  do 
our  bureaucrats have any idea of how to do this - the  pollution 
control  bureaucracy  is  today  one  of  the  most  pathetically 
incompetent  bureaucracies  in  the country - and  nor  does  the 
government  want  to  do  anything  -  the   polluter-politician-
bureaucrat nexus being extremely strong.

What then does this mean? It simply means that India will not  be 
able to clean up its pollution in one generation. If it takes  at 
least  two generations, we will begin to see cleaner air only  by 
the 2040s. In other words, the current urban generation is  going  
to  leave behind a totally unlivable habitat for at least two  of 
its  succeeding  generations. The future is,  therefore,  nothing 
less than frightening.

One  may  ask how generations can pass by without  any  effective 
action being taken. That this can happen in the future is clearly 
shown by the past. It was in 1981 that the Air Pollution  Control 
Act was legislated. Nearly 20 years, that is, one generation  has 
already  gone  by  without  the  Central  or  any  of  the  State 
governments having even developed an effective action plan  which 
clearly aims at bringing down pollution to levels that will  give 
us  clean air. Both the Central and State governments  have  only 
promoted  cosmetic  exercises like checking the rear  of  private 
motor cars or scooters - a technique that only puts the blame  on 
the   victim.  Even  the  Andhra  Pradesh  Chief  Minister,   Mr. 
Chandrababu  Naidu,  otherwise a very savvy politician,  had  his 
picture proudly taken while checking the exhaust-pipe of a car.

What  does this pollution mean in terms of economic growth?  Will 
the economy be affected by this pollution? The unfortunate answer 
is: No.

Politicians  and  industrialists do not have to  learn  any  real 
lesson.  Things  can go on as usual without any of  these  groups 
suffering. As classical economic texts point out, pollution  will 
even help the economy to grow. Bottling water industry will  grow 
by leaps and bounds. So will hospitals and  pharmaceuticals. Yes, 
certain  costs will definitely go up. Drinking water  costs,  for 
example.  The rich are already paying for bottled drinking  water 
as much as they pay for milk. But, to meet the needs of the poor, 
the government will have to invest heavily to treat the  polluted 
waters  to  turn  them  into drinking water  quality  -  and  if, 
however,  the government fails to do so because of lack of  money 
or  political  will, as it is already doing so - then it  is  the 
poor  who  will have to pay the biggest price - the  price  being 
their very lives.

Air pollution will be the biggest leveller because it will affect 
both  the rich and the poor. But the rich will be able to  afford 
the  cost of dealing with chronic asthma and cancer  whereas  the 
poor  will not be able to do so. In other words,  India's  wealth 
will be built on the backs of its poor, its elderly, its children 
and those genetically susceptible. Not on the back of the economy 
but on the back of public health.

What  does  this  mean in terms of numbers? How  many  will  die? 
Today, about a million die each year because of water pollution - 
and  this  is still largely because of the  traditional  form  of 
pollution which results from human filth. The new water pollution 
will  add to this all kinds of horrendous diseases  like  cancers 
and  neurological  disorders. It is estimated that at  least  one 
lakh  die each year from urban air pollution. Thus, at the  least 
one million or more will continue to die from pollution each year 
in India. This figure will rise to probably two to three  million 
a  year with growing pollution. But tens of millions will  suffer  
from high rates of illness and a very poor quality of life.

If we were to take one generation to control pollution, we  would 
have  killed  off  at least 20-30  million  people,  mostly  poor 
people.  And if we were take two generations, the  numbers  could 
rise to 40-60 million people.

The  problem is that these numbers are so small that for  India's 
politicians and industrialists they mean absolutely nothing. What 
do  50 million deaths - or murders - mean in a country  which  is 
already  1,000 billion and likely to grow to 1,500 billion  soon? 
Economic  growth  will come at a high price only  for  those  who 
suffer from the pollution. The sad fact is that the dead and  the 
diseased  have never protested before and neither do  the  living 
poor because they have to give priority to their today.  Probably 
50  million poor people have already been killed off in the  last 
50  years of independence because of the inaction on the part  of 
our  political  system  to deal with  poverty.  Independence  has 
definitely come to us at a high price but it has made no material 
difference to the politicians.

Surely  all this is deeply immoral. But who is going  to  protest 
against this immorality?

That is where, in fact, the answer lies. If anything is going  to 
change, it will not come from the electoral part of democracy. It 
will come from those elements of democracy which give its  people 
certain  rights  - the right to free speech, the  right  to  form 
associations,  and the right to protest, especially the right  to 
go  to court. In other words, exactly as in the West, it  is  our 
civil society which will have to literally browbeat the country's 
elected  representatives into action. In fact, the fight  against 
pollution  will succeed only if it becomes a people's movement  - 
an  urban  people's movement which can count on an  active  group 
against pollution in every town and city working together as  one 
force.

But this will not be an easy task. People will be given all kinds 
of confusing information. By the government and by the  industry. 
Critical  information will be held back by  government  officials 
and scientists. There will be few scientists ready to speak  out. 
Despite  the  high levels of particulates in the urban  air,  the 
Centre for Science and Environment has not been able to find  one 
single  scientist  in  the country who  has  studied  the  health 
effects  of  this pollutant. In such a situation,  every  attempt 
will be made to divert attention to inconsequential issues.  And, 
to  boot,  fighting pollution is an  intensely  scientific  task. 
Unless the civil society itself acquires scientific expertise  or 
finds willing scientists to work with it, and then finds  willing 
judges  to tame the politicians and the bureaucrats, getting  the 
balance  between environment and development will prove to be  an 
elusive task.

I am convinced that it is not going to be an India that anyone of 
us  dreamed of. Poor. Polluted. And politically sick. Welcome  to  
the 21st Century. 
