
American sanskriti 


AMERICANS  just  cannot get enough of sanskriti.  Any  aspect  of 
Indian  culture  will do - arts, crafts,  literature,  mythology, 
cosmetics,  yoga,  dance,  music  and  of  course,  cuisine   and 
religion.  When  Arundhati  Roy was in Washington  for  a  second 
reading  and  signing  of  her  The  God  of  Small  Things,  the 
Smithsonian  auditorium was packed. I waited half an hour for  my 
moment  of  darshan and her signature. Ustad  Vilayat  Khan  also 
packed them in recently.

You can buy a snazzy Henna Body Art or a Bindi kit at your  local 
Barnes & Noble bookstore and doll up for a night on the town. The 
great  sage  Vatsyayana has many devotees here.  The  illustrated 
Kama Sutra is number one on the list of gifts for newlyweds.  One 
of my students recently offered me a bidi, the trendy new  smoke. 
I  respectfully declined, suddenly hit with a flashback to a  by-
gone era. It all came back - the fits of convulsive coughing, the 
more than usual disorientation, the respiratory distress in  that 
back alley of Sipri Bazaar, the derision of putative friends, the 
snickering  of passers-by. No longer forbidden fruit,  the  thing 
had lost its allure. Besides, I added smugly, I didn't  recognise 
the  brand. Not that Ganesh Chaap stuff, or that weed which  once 
brought into question the very meaning of existence.

We  Americans sit all day in an office, then rush off to  a  yoga 
class to work off surplus tissue or tone up what we want to keep. 
We  are  a nation of yoga fanatics if not  exactly  yogis.  South 
Asian restaurants spring up all over the place like croci in  the 
spring.  We love the sitar. The Indian Palace, a  creditable  new 
Baltimore  restaurant,  features  Jay  Kishor,  a  gifted   young 
American sitar and surbahar virtuoso, student of Annapurna  Devi. 
Jay  is  a  visiting artist with  the  internationally  acclaimed 
Baltimore  Symphony  Orchestra  now  under  the  baton  of   Yuri 
Temirkanov,  the  great  Russian  conductor.  Ours  is  a   truly 
international city.

Last week Jay tried out a new "fusion" piece he was working on. I 
liked  it, having encouraged him not to disparage  exploring  new 
musical  languages.  The best Indian restaurants here  are  those 
which  spice  up the traditional menu with a  "specialite  de  la 
maison" or two inspired by classical Indian gastronomy. For  some 
reason,  perhaps  because creative chefs are  better  at  basics, 
their khormas and naans sometimes remind me of pukka  Hindusthani 
food back home in India. My gustatory and olfactory memory rarely 
fails me. Tradition is dynamic and American tastes are no more  a 
threat than alu tikki burgers are to fast food culture. 

American  interest  in all things Indian took a  noticeable  jump 
after The Festival of India in 1986-87. During the summer of 1987 
the  Mall (maidan) at The Smithsonian Institution  in  Washington 
DC, was set up as a virtual Indian mela. There were pavilions for 
classical  and  folk  dance, musical  groups,  arts,  crafts  and  
cuisine from all over India. For me, the Aditi exhibit  featuring 
a Rajasthani family of minstrels and stunning visual displays  of 
village  folk  art was the crowning glory of  the  Festival.  The 
crowds   were  mesmerised  by  the  colours,  the   sounds,   the 
fragrances,  the images, the exquisite craftsmanship,  the  lithe 
movements of the dance, the costumes. Indian peasant artists were 
mesmerised  by  the loud, "Ah Gee, this is cool! Freaks  me  out, 
man!," baseball cap wearing, bubble gum chewing, flashy tanktops, 
shorts, extruded morph Americans in summer molt. Who was watching 
whom? The only thing missing perhaps was the follow-up. As far as 
I  know  there were no joint  Indian-American  designed  primary, 
secondary   and  university-level  instructional  programmes   to 
capitalise on the enthusiastic reception of the American  people. 
This  was,  perhaps,  a  missed  opportunity  which  may  yet  be 
remedied.

Celebrations  of the fiftieth anniversary of Indian  Independence 
took  place all over America, capitalising on the success of  The 
Festival  of India. One of the most elaborate programmes was  put 
together by Swashpawan Singh, the first Indian Consul General  in 
Houston,  Texas.  Exhibitions  of  paintings  of  Indian   school 
children,  of  village  folk art and individual  artists  gave  a 
glimpse of ordinary India. A Distinguished Lecture Series brought 
Indians from all walks of life to Houston. It was my privilege to 
talk about the Hindu tradition as an emerging American religion. 

The  Smithsonian Institution must be one of India's best  friends 
in  Washington. Though the Festival of India was a tough  act  to 
follow, two Smithsonian exhibitions have come close. The  Sackler 
Gallery's  current  Puja Exhibit not only presents  Hindu  temple 
worship  with  reverence but it also has the power  to  awaken  a 
sense  of  spirituality in anyone open to  the  possibility.  The 
recent  Devi Exhibit at the Freer Gallery conveyed  the  abstract 
idea  of the goddess in an extraordinarily artistic  way  through 
the  display  of  voluptuous form.  Both  exhibitions  won  major 
international awards.

Last  spring the Smithsonian's College on the Mall highlighted  a 
lecture series on Rajasthan. The series was a smash hit from  the 
opening  lecture  by the Maharaja of Jodhpur.  Once  a  Maharaja, 
always a Maharaja in America. We love royalty here. Bapji, as  he 
was  known  during  our Oxford days, gave a slide  lecture  to  a 
packed  house  on  the art and  architecture  of  Rajasthan  with 
special emphasis on Jodhpur. Following up on the Maharaja's  very 
popular presentation, Milo Beach, the Curator of the Sackler  and 
Freer Galleries who organised the Festival of India, is leading a 
Smithsonian study tour to Jodhpur and Rajasthan this month. Bapji 
very  kindly accepted my invitation to give a special lecture  at 
the Foreign Service Institute of the U.S. Department of State. My 
own  summer  1999  lecture  series  "Hinduism:  Living  Faith  in 
America"  at  the Smithsonian's College on the Mall  was  clearly 
another follow-up response to the interest in India stimulated by 
the  Puja  and Devi exhibitions and by the  Maharaja's  Rajasthan 
series.

Throughout  America, mini-festivals spring up during  the  summer 
months  particularly. Baltimore's large Indian community puts  on 
one  of  the  best every year.  Private  and  public  collections 
abound.  The Walter's Art Gallery in Baltimore is home to one  of 
the  world's  finest collections of Indian erotic  painting.  The 
Walters  has sponsored Indian cultural education  programmes  for 
secondary school teachers in which I have been involved.

The  Festival  of  India, the  nation-wide  fiftieth  anniversary 
celebrations  of  Indian  Independence,  the  Smithsonian's  many 
exhibitions, Indian writers and celebrities like the Maharaja  of 
Jodhpur  and  others have all helped to broaden the  spectrum  of 
American  appreciation for Indian culture. One  very  significant 
indication that Indian culture is accepted within the  mainstream 
of American popular culture is the sometimes disconcerting fun we 
poke  at  it.  Take  note of this  very  important  though  often 
misunderstood  unwritten  rule of American society. If  we  can't 
have a good laugh or two at your expense then you and your  group 
are  not on the screen. You are invisible. But you have  arrived, 
you  are  one  of  us (whatever the worthiness  of  that)  if  we 
satirise you.

Americans  love  a  good roast. We love to put  people  up  on  a 
pedestal then knock them off just to see them fall. Everything or 
everyone in American public life is fair game. Have you heard the 
latest  Jay Leno or Letterman Clinton (Bill or Hillary) joke?  Or 
on Mark Russell's political satire show? Sometimes, no - most  of 
the  time, our satire crosses the line into scandalous  ridicule. 
This  is  an  elemental part of our  strange  national  brand  of 
humour.

The risk is part of the roast. Will the thing go too far, we  ask 
ourselves  balancing there precariously on the edge of the  sofa, 
bug-eyes  riveted to the tube, washing down cheekfuls of  popcorn 
and  veggie  samosas  with  coke  or  trendy  microbrew  in  rapt 
anticipation  of  the  "kill". We are  rarely  disappointed.  The 
recent  lawsuit  over  the  cover  of  a  popular  arts  magazine 
featuring  a famous comedian dressed up vaguely as a Hindu  deity 
was  viewed by most who paid any attention to it at all as  petty 
nonsense.  Hyper-sensitivity is usually a lightning rod for  more 
down and dirty satire.

One  memorable  episode of the popular but  now  discontinued  TV 
comedy series "Seinfeld" featured an Indian wedding shot in India 
satirising Americanised Indians who cannot quite break away  from 
strong  family ethnic traditions. This episode poignantly  called 
attention  to the tension many Americans experience  between  the 
old  and the new. We are, after all, an emigrant nation. Most  of 
us either have or have had living relatives in other countries or 
want  them  so badly we invent them. I once belonged to  the  St. 
Andrews Society of Baltimore, the oldest ethnic heritage  society 
in America. Ostensibly the salient requirement for membership was 
authenticated Scottish ancestry. Many members, I soon discovered, 
needed a high-priced attorney if they had any chance of squeaking 
a case by for even the remotest connection with Scotland. 

"The  Simpsons," another even more irreverent comedy series,  has 
regularly made fun of the rage for all things Indian in  American 
society.  Among  the most amused by all of this are  some  of  my 
Indian-American  friends. American sanskriti is a  nutrient  rich 
Sargasso Sea of the best and, alas, sometimes the worst of  world 
cultures which find their way to our shores, to which we add  our 
own  home  grown best and worst. It is Saturday evening  and  the 
last  scherzo of dint gat in tintal of Vilayat Khan's Raga  Shree 
CD  (jacket  signed  of  course) has faded  away  in  a  rhythmic 
flourish    and my family and guests are off to another     pukka 
American dinner party at the Indian Palace. 

BRUCE C. ROBERTSON
