
Necessary madness 


IMUST  declare my interest in The Surgeon Of Crowthorne by  Simon 
Winchester,  because it has been one of the Penguin Group's  most 
successful  books in 1999. I resisted reviewing it for  a  while, 
because  it  was a Penguin, but having read it recently,  in  the 
course  of a business trip, I knew I had to share  my  enthusiasm 
for the book, having declared my affiliations, of course.

The Surgeon Of Crowthorne is a non-fiction book that reads like a 
thriller; indeed, a lot of the better non-fiction writers, in any 
genre, would do well to take a leaf out of Mr. Winchester's book, 
at least where narrative pace and style are concerned. Given  the 
number  of  excellent  writers who have  started  producing  very 
readable  non-fiction  books,  I think that there  is  really  no 
excuse for turgid prose and ponderous tomes to exist,  especially 
when  these  are  the  product of  lazy  thinking  and  shipstood 
writing.

The Surgeon... is an engrossing investigation into the making of 
the Oxford English Dictionary (the OED) and the lives of the  two 
men who, above everyone else, made possible this massive work  of 
scholarship,  unparalleled  before  or  since  its   publication. 
Heralding  the news that it was finally completed on  New  Year's 
day  1928,  The New York Times declared that is was "one  of  the 
great romance of the English literature". The 12 volumes  defined 
4,14,825 words, used 1,827,306 quotations, and had used 178 miles 
of handset type. It had taken 70 years to complete. As Winchester 
writes:  "other  dictionaries in other languages took  longer  to 
make;  but none was grander or had more authority than this.  The 
greatest  effort  since the invention of  printing.  The  longest 
sensational serial ever written".

The  Surgeon...  goes  behind the  scenes  of  this  monumental 
undertaking  via the lives of two extraordinary  Victorians.  The 
first of course is Dr. James Murray, editor of the dictionary who 
died  a few years before the book was completed  having  overseen 
its preparation upto the letter 'T'. Dr. Murray was born the  son 
of  a  tailor and a linen draper in a little market town  in  the 
Scottish  borderlands  but,  given  his  precociousness,  and   a 
voracious  appetite "for all kinds of learning", he was,  in  the 
course   of  time  "to  become  a  towering  figure  in   British 
scholarships". Quite an achievement for a man who had to drop out 
of  school  on account of his poverty.  However,  his  insatiable 
thirst  for knowledge made him a self-taught savant and  won  him 
many  admirers  including influential critics and  academics.  In 
time  his prodigious learning let to a meeting on April 26,  1878 
"to  an awesome full meeting of the grandest minds in  the  land, 
the Delegates of the Oxford University Press".

The  men  present at the meeting were among others  the  Dean  of 
Christ Church, Oxford, Henry Liddell, Max Muller, the philologist 
who  holds the Chair of Comparative Philosophy,  William  Stubbs,  
the  Regius  Professor  of  History and  so  on.  Describing  the 
constellation  of stars of the academic world, Winchester  writes 
"High  Church, High Learning, High Ambition: these were  the  Men 
who   counted,   the  architects  of   the   great   intellectual 
constructions  that  originated during England's  haughtiest  and 
most self-confident time. As Brunel was to bridges and  railways, 
as Burton was to Africa and as Scott was soon to be to the  Pole, 
so these men were the best, the makers of indelible monuments  to 
learning:  of  the books that were to be the  foundation  of  the 
great libraries all around the globe.

"And they had a project, they said, in which Murray might well be 
very  interested  indeed.  A project that,  unwittingly  for  all 
concerned,  was  eventually to put Murray on a  collision  course 
with  a  man  whose  interests and  whose  piety  were  curiously 
congruent with his own".

The  project  was  the  making of the OED,  or  the  New  English 
Dictionary  as it was then called, and then the man Murray  would 
collide with, as he set about making it, was the other  principal 
protagonist of this book, Dr. W.C Minor. Dr. Minor was a  wealthy 
American  surgeon and he first came to notice of the  authorities 
when  he  was  shot and killed a  young  labourer  called  George 
Merrett in a disreputable neighbourhood in London. When examined, 
he was discovered to be a certifiable lunatic and suffering  from 
what  we  now  call dementia praecox of the  paranoid  form  that 
caused him to suffer from hallucinations and paranoid  delusions. 
He was locked away for 47 of the 48 years of life left to him  in 
lunatic  asylums, principally Broadmoor and it was then  that  he 
was  to embark on the biggest achievements of his life,  that  of 
one of the most important contributors to the OED.

Simon Winchester does full justice to the drama of the  situation 
he  sets out to explore. Murray and Minor are  brilliantly  drawn 
and everywhere the making of the greatest dictionary in the world 
provides  a  fitting  counterpoint.  The  Surgeon  Of  Crowthrone 
finally,  is that rarity, a literary masterpiece that is  also  a 
brilliant read. 

DAVID DAVIDAR
