
A temple regains its glory 


The consecration of the Srivilliputtur temple tower is to be held 
on  February  10. This has become possible  after  battling  with 
official apathy for years. A report by T.A.SRINIVASAN. 

THE   196  foot  tall  tower  of  the  Andal  -   Rangamannar   - 
Vatapatrasayee  temple  at Srivilliputtur, which the  Tamil  Nadu 
Government has adopted as its emblem and the twin temple  complex 
have at last been renovated at last at a cost of Rs. 2.50 crores. 
They are to be consecrated on February 10.

In the Tamil month of Margazhi, Andal's Tiruppavai echoed in  the 
morning hours. It was at Srivilliputtur that Andal was found as a 
five-year-old child in the Tulsi garden by the Vaishnavite saint, 
Vishnuchittar,  who earned the title of Periyazhwar. Andal,  from 
her  childhood, longed to marry the Lord. The  Thiruppavai  hymns 
essentially   deal  with  her  spiritual  exercise   and   mystic 
excursions.  They are unusual in that they reflect  the  thoughts 
reaching  beyond the customary bounds of a person in her teens  - 
Andal  lived  in this world only for 15 years, according  to  the 
scriptures of the temple.

The  house where Periyazhwar and Andal lived became  the  nucleus 
for  the  new  temple constructed over 600 years  ago  while  the 
Vatapatrasayee  temple,  was  built  over  1,200  years  ago.  An 
inscription in the temple, dating back to 973 A.D. describes  the 
arrangements made for the morning worship there.

The temple's tower, with such a hoary past, developed cracks over 
35  years  ago  and its renovation began on  June  5,  1970.  The 
scriptures stipulate that temples should be consecrated every  12 
years  and  the earlier purification ceremony took place  in  the 
Forties. After 1970, it was decided to strengthen the tower at  a 
cost  of Rs. 3.29 lakhs. Meanwhile, the huge wooden pillars,  put 
up  at  each of the 11 tiers, began to give way  and  the  cracks 
widen. The public raised a hue and cry.

But  the  lethargic government machinery took another  decade  to 
wake up to the issue and the renovation work was  "reinaugurated" 
by  Mr.  R. M. Veerappan, who was the  Religious  and  Charitable 
Endowments Minister, on November 10, 1981, according to a  plaque 
found  on the western side of the tower. Nothing was  done  after 
that.  After another five years, a third inauguration took  place 
on  January  25,  1986, in the presence of  the  then  Industries 
Minister,  Mr. K. Rajaram. It was announced that  Sri  Varadaraja 
Ethiraja  Jeeyar  of  Sriperumbudur would bear the  cost  of  the 
renovation  work. But he fell out of favour with  the  Government 
and his plans did not fructify.

The  renovation  work became a reality only in 1990 when  it  was 
entrusted  to  the  Tamil  Nadu  State  Construction  Corporation 
(TNSCC).  The tower is a hollow structure with a granite wall  up  
to  a height of 32 ft and above it there is a 164-foot brick  and 
lime  mortar  structure. Wooden planks were used to  provide  the 
flooring  at  each tier. The planks were supported by  huge  teak 
pillars,  all easily obtained from the forest lands owned by  the 
temple at "Shenbaga Thoppu" in the Western Ghats.

The TNSCC engineers laid a pile foundation. The piles were put up 
to strengthen the old basement. 

The  wooden pillars have been replaced with RCC beams and  slabs. 
About 125 tonnes of cement was used to close the holes and cracks 
on  the  inner and outer walls of the tower's basement  known  as 
kalkaaram.  The  side walls have been plastered  by  an  improved 
method, known as "gunitting" or plastering by using weld mesh and 
chips.  The Mugasalai, or the entrance portion of each of the  11 
tiers,  which  were  damaged, have been  rebuilt.  Gunitting  the 
pandial or the top-most portion of the tower was completed during 
the first phase of the work in 1991 at a cost of Rs. 60 lakhs.

After  a  lull  of  four years, the second  phase  of  the  work-
plastering  of the outer walls of the tower and relaying  of  the 
Sudhai  images - was taken up at a cost of Rs. 30 lakhs in  1995. 
Scaffoldings  were raised and the tower was covered on all  sides 
with thatches but they collapsed during heavy rains two years ago 
before the painting of the images could be taken up. Only after a 
new renovation committee under the presidentship of industrialist 
P.  R. Ramasubrahmaneya Rajha was constituted in September  1997, 
did the work started looking up. New scaffoldings were put up and 
the painting work has almost been completed now.

The   renovation   of   the  vimanams   over   the   shrines   of 
Vatapatrasayee, Periazhwar, Narasimhar, Ramanuja and  Nammazhwar, 
the  Thiruppavai Vimanam in the Andal temple, laying of tiles  on 
the  ceilings  of both temples, repairing of  Dwajasthambams  and 
Palipeetams  and other works were also taken up. All  these  have 
been done with donations.

The  temple had no income of its own though it owned  over  1,000 
acres of fertile lands, groves and forest lands. Even if one  bag 
of  paddy is got from each acre of its lands, the temple will  be 
richer  by 1,000 bags every year and this will be enough to  meet 
the  daily pooja expenses. But that was not to be, thanks to  the 
strange tenancy laws so poojas are being conducted now only  with 
public donations.

Andal had a special longing for the Lords of Tirumala  (Tirupati) 
and  Alagarkoil near Madurai, as expressed in her poems and  both 
the  Lords wear the garlands used by Andal, on particular days  - 
the former on the Garudotsavam day in the month of Purattasi  and 
the latter on the Chithra Pournami day, at Madurai. The Tirupati-
Tirumala  Devasthanam  has  sanctioned  Rs.  25  lakhs  for   the 
renovation  of the Andal temple but it is awaiting the  clearance 
of the Andhra Pradesh Government.

The  two temples have been sanctified by the visit of  preceptors  
like Ramanuja, Anandazhwan, Vedanta Desika and Manavala Mamunigal 
and numerous are the episodes connected with them and the temple. 
Krishnadevaraya, ruler of Vijayanagar, composed "Amukta  Malyata" 
in  Telugu in praise of Andal. The great Tamil poet,  Kamban  has 
compared the Andal temple tower to legendary Mount Meru in one of 
his poems. There are many wooden carvings in both temples and the 
Gopalavilasam  hall in the Vatapatrasayee temple is excellent  in 
its  conception and these as well as the frescoes on the  ceiling 
at the entrance of the Andal temple, and huge granite  sculptures 
in  its  pillars,  numbering over a dozen,  remain  as  permanent 
evidences to our rich cultural heritage.

Everyone  visiting the town will be awestruck by the tall  tower, 
the huge car and the spacious tank. No other place is as holy  as 
Srivilliputtur  as  it is the birth place of two great  saints  - 
Periyazhwar and Andal. 
