
Between change and futurism 


THE last day of the old century, as also the first day of the new 
one,  have both come and gone. And while the issue of  this  year 
being  the beginning of the new millennium is still  a  debatable 
one;  journalism  seems to have transformed itself  into  a  vast 
quiz-show-cum  list makers' workshop. Here each participant  must 
submit  a list (or lists) of the five 10, 100 or 1,000  best  and 
worst  people/incidents/disasters. They are  also  simultaneously 
egged on to predict what the new year/decade/century/  millennium 
has  in store for mankind/womankind. And surprise, surprise,  all 
kinds  of generally sensible and level-headed colleagues seem  to 
have  suddenly flipped under this onslaught of The  Future.  Most 
have  obligingly  churned out ponderous (and  mostly  humourless) 
predictions  about what life will be like for friends,  citizens, 
nerds  and  netizens in the coming age of  technology.  Few  have 
cared  to admit that most of us hacks, with our  usual  attention 
deficit  disorders  exaggerated even more by the chaotic  age  we 
have passed through, cannot even remember the political  scandals 
and scams of last year.

History  is  not  laid  out within the human mind  as  it  is  in 
museums:  each  empire,  each  period,  each  great   personality 
carefully  separated and logged. Our imaginations are  constantly 
haunted by ghosts of times departed and times present. And  human 
freedom  remains not just a matter of legal rights, but also  the 
need  to decide, to consult and to be guided by noble ideas.  One 
of  the most attractive promises democracy still has, is that  it 
will  provide  respect  for everybody. (Athens  ensured  this  by 
giving the vote to all citizens, and also by rotating offices  by 
lot).

Let us see how the incidents of times past and times present have 
affected and shaped this particular aspect of our individual  and 
collective  lives.  Inspite of all the giant  steps  mankind  has 
taken in the 20th Century, the basic human needs - love,  justice 
and honour - remain an integral part of the concept of democracy. 
These  ideals  will  still be shaping  democracies  in  the  21st 
Century  and will not be changed in any fundamental way,  by  the 
newest  bio-technological finds or latest in  Microsoft  Windows. 
Fundamental changes will continue to be ushered in the world  not 
by   machines,  but  ideas.  Real  and  lasting   challenges   to 
colonialism,  casteism,  racism, sexism and Marxism in  the  last 
century emerged, not from the steam locomotives, steel  furnaces, 
penicillin  or  the  Internet, but from our  basic  yearning  for 
respect  and  self-rule. Respect cannot be achieved by  the  same 
methods as power, otherwise Dawood Ibrahim and Colombian druglord 
Escobar  would have had shrines erected for them. The search  for 
genuine  respect follows an atavistic, ethical map  and  requires 
mediators,  like  Medha  Patkar and Ambedkar.  It  also  requires 
encouragers and counsellors like Gandhiji and Freud and Marx.

Despite  all our debates and public discussions, we Indians  have  
entered  the  21st Century with our colonial and  feudal  biases, 
political  and bureaucratic corruption, more or less intact.  Can 
we  hope  that in the coming years, satellite  phones,  Microsoft 
Windows, the Web and the Internet and medical techniques such  as 
amniocentesis,  organ and embryo transplants, will wash  out  all 
this  debris? In the absence of clear ethical guidelines and  the 
right  mediators  and counsellors, amniocentesis  is  being  used 
blatantly  to  abort female foetuses and  strengthen  patriarchal 
biases.  Cell-phones  are not connecting societies,  but  helping 
jailed  mafia-dons to run their criminal empires and  to  arrange 
murders   and   kidnappings.   And   brilliant   organ-transplant 
techniques  have generated a huge and clandestine market  in  the 
buying and selling of organs of the poor to save and prolong  the 
lives of the rich. All our recent media stories and images  prove 
that women and the poor are still conspicuous by their absence in 
national  security councils, as wars become more and more  costly 
and localised.

Interestingly, the corporate managerial world has been quicker to 
realise  the need for acquiring new ideas and ideals rather  than 
brandishing  power  for transforming  societies.  The  aggressive 
workaholic  hero-manager  who  terrified his  employees  is  fast 
becoming  passe. Though aggression, as a virtue, still retains  a 
niche  in  corporate  vocabulary, the concept  of  power  in  the 
boardroom has been given a newer form by the nerds. Management in 
the  corporate world is now a casual, focussed and liberal  game-
playing, in which everyone who works hard but takes care to  look 
free  of stress, has a chance of winning a  sweat-equity  option. 
The  new psychiatry and feminist scholarship have  also  revealed 
the  power-hungry  control freaks as sick and suffering  from  an 
allergy to disagreement. True, at the moment the Indian corporate 
scene  is  still divided between the old work-ethic and  the  new 
democratisation of the work place, but pressures of globalisation 
are  fast removing age-old barriers to alternate  work  practices 
and in the humanisation of the market place.

The other promising area is the "Mandalisation" of our democracy. 
The  first  wave  of "Mandalised" elections may  have  thrown  up 
backward  leaders of dubious to despicable merits in  the  North; 
but  in  the South, where the gestation period for the  idea  has 
been  twice as long; we are witnessing the simultaneous  rise  of 
leaders  with  potential,  and  a  deepening  and  broadening  of 
democracy among the masses. As a result, even the world of  women 
in  the  four Southern States, is now displaying  positive  signs 
like increased literacy, decreased infant and maternal  mortality 
rates  and  greater  and a better rate of  participation  in  the 
institutions of democracy such as the gram panchayats.

Time and again, the major changes in history, we will do well  to 
remember, have resulted not from bloody wars and boardroom coups, 
but from individuals sidestepping the world of the autocrats  and 
placing  their  allegiance  in higher  democratic  and  spiritual 
values  that  satisfy  the  basic hunger  for  love,  honour  and 
justice.  The  movements for human rights, women's  equality  and 
sanctity of the environment may be in their infancy in India, but  
they spring from the same hunger among ordinary people. 

It is this desire that shall usher in lasting change in the  21st 
Century,  much  as it did in the First, when the meek  were  told 
they shall inherit the earth. 

MRINAL PANDE

The  author  writes  in  Hindi and English  and  is  a  freelance 
journalist.
