
A mandala for well-being 


Life's  greatest achievements are gained through small,  everyday 
actions.  What  are  these? Fitness expert  PEG  JORDAN  suggests 
simple tools which are important to an individual's well-being.

SOONER  or later, you will catch on to something that  the  sages 
understood: that life's greatest achievements are gained  through 
the accumulated sum of small, daily disciplines. What better  way 
to  start the new year than to dedicate yourself to a journey  of 
well-being,  all accomplished through simple, daily actions.  Out 
of the many possible lives you could be living, it is the  small, 
daily actions that determine the one you have.

To make this well-being journey easier, I have devised a sort  of 
well-being  mandala  for you to imagine, draw  or  otherwise  get 
creative  with, and chart your progress. The mandala gives you  a 
visual  portrait  of  your present level of  health  based  on  a 
holistic approach to mental, physical and spiritual  functioning. 
But it can only do so if you make a sincere appraisal of how  you 
take care of yourself and honour your commitments.

Mandalas   have   appeared  throughout  the  ages   as   symbolic 
representations  of  a culture's worldview or an  artist's  inner 
life. A Hindu sacred mandala shows the energy of the Mother as  a 
series  of  concentric triangles, known as the Sri  Yantra.  Many 
indigenous   people  create  round  earth  shields  with   shell, 
features, leather and other materials sacred to the tribe. During 
the  European middle ages, mandalas were evident in  the  stained 
glass  windows  of great cathedrals such as  Chartres  and  Notre 
Dame.  The Tibetan Buddhist monks create  short-lived,  exquisite 
mandalas of coloured sand representing their entire cosmology and 
endless impermanence.

Your  personalised well-being mandala serves as a tool  for  your 
imagination,  spurring  you  to  adopt  and  enjoy  more  healthy 
activities.  By shading in the various spokes of the wheel,  your 
wheel will evolve into a colourful pictogram that depicts exactly 
where  you are focusing your time and energy, and where  you  may 
need to give more attention. It will help you identify imbalances 
in your daily life. Do you spend too much time at work? Are  your 
responsibilities crowding out areas of self-care? How well do you 
balance  routine demands with family, friends, play and  personal 
growth?

Think  of  it  as  a living wheel,  always  in  flux,  constantly 
readjusting  to  the shifting demands and desires of  your  life. 
Once  you have made an effort to redirect your  efforts,  re-draw 
your  wheel every few months to get a new visual symbol  of  your 
well-being. 

How  to  complete  your wheel: Filling in your  wheel  should  be 
illuminating, fun, and creative. Use pencils or coloured  markers  
to   highlight  each  section  as  you  grow  in  awareness   and 
proficiency.  You will find six spoked sections  which  represent 
the  six chief areas of well-being. Under each section, you  will 
find  several  questions,  intended to help you  round  out  your 
commitment  to  that  section. How many can  you  answer  in  the 
affirmative?  If you do not get a perfect score at all  once,  do 
not worry. No one does. Your well-being mandala should  accompany 
you  throughout the year. Post it in a visible place,  where  you 
can  gain  the skills and awareness of  including  these  simple, 
daily actions in your life. Once you have scored impressively  in 
one  section,  colour  it  in and  make  your  mandala  a  lovely 
spectacle. Have fun with it. 

* * *

Six-spoked wheel of harmony

Pleasurable movement

Do you take delight in daily physical activity?

Do you grant yourself a dedicated time for stretching each day?

Do you gather 30 minutes of aerobic exercise each day?

Do you strength train three times a week?

Do you practice breathing meditations and rituals?

Do you take time each day to work on balance and coordination?

Do you cultivate personal power for good purpose?

Do you know how to generate energy whenever needed?

Do you take time to melt away stress and tension?

Do you let rhythm and music move you?

* * *

Right nourishment:

Do you eat only what is best for you?

Do you keep yourself well hydrated with clean water?

Do  you  eat according to the season, and what is grown  in  your 
region?

Do you wisely use nutritional supplements and healing herbs?

Do  you  practice  a twice yearly ritual  of  cleansing  fast  or 
detoxification?

* * * 

Smart self-care:

Do  you  treat  your body so well that you  look  and  feel  much 
younger than your actual years?

Do you get massages regularly?

Do you enjoy aromatherapy in the home or office?

Have  you  learned  how to unclutter your lift  and  shed  what's 
outdated?

Do you live within your financial means?

Do you give your body the rest and deep sleep it needs?

Do you avoid cigarette smoke and refrain from smoking yourself?

Do you give attention to plants and flowers in your living space?

Do you practice safety measures?

* * *

Intellectual well-being:

Do you practice relaxation techniques to quieten the mind?

Can  you  imagine  another's viewpoint and be  flexible  in  your 
opinion?

Do you have work that you find enjoyable and rewarding?

Is you emotional IQ as healthy as your intellectual IQ?

Are you recognised for being optimistic most of the time?

Are you a continuous learner in the school of life?

* * *

Emotional well-being:

Can you forgive others and forgive yourself?

Are you able to express hurt and anger without blame?

Can  you  confront  your fears and  transform  them  to  learning 
opportunities?

Can  you call on support from friends and family without  feeling 
guilty?

Do  you know the joy of giving and receiving love? Can  you  feel 
shy and still reach out?

Do  you  volunteer at a nonprofit charity  or  good-works  centre 
occasionally?

Do you tell the truth even when it's not easy?

Can you usually think of something funny and laugh at yourself?

Do you take time to express gratitude and appreciation?

Do you avoid generalisations, ethnic jokes and prejudices?

* * *

Spiritual well-being:

Do you reserve a portion of each day for the divine?

Do you sense purpose and meaning in your life?

Do you grow inspired whenever you see with your heart?

Do you have a strong sense of community and belonging?

Blessings on your simple, daily actions. 
