
Herbal explorations 


Every family has its own storehouse of herbal remedies useful for 
treating  different ailments. SHEELA RANI CHUNKATH selects  seven 
herbs  common  in urban areas. These can either be  used  in  the 
traditional  way  by boiling the leaves, extracted  as  juice  or 
applied as paste. 

IT  is a damp, chilly day and you have the beginnings of a  cold. 
But it need not be an ordeal if you try herbal inhalation and the 
remedies given below. You will feel a lot better.

Take  a  handful  of Adhatoda zeylanica,  Vitex  negundo,  Leucas 
aspera, Ocimum sanctum, Acalypha indica, Anisochilus carnosus and 
Azadirachta  indica... If these sound like Greek and  Latin  to 
you, that is what they are: these are Latin (botanical) names. 

In  rural  South India, it is easy to locate  the  plants  listed 
here. In case you are in a metropolis you will have to search. It 
happened  to me. Once I started looking, I found a few places  in 
and  around  Besant Nagar, Chennai, where I could get  Nochi  and 
Adhathodai  leaves.  Neem, Kuppaimeni and Thumbai  grow  wild  in 
Chennai,  unless of course the Corporation of Chennai has  struck 
and  cemented  them out of existence. Thulasi  and  Omavalli  are 
grown in many homes.

Do  not  be too worried if you miss a herb or two. Once  you  get 
going and even start talking to the elderly, you can come up with 
your  own remedies to be used in inhalation by adapting the  ones 
given  here or those that have been used by family  and  friends. 
The good thing about herbal remedies is that each family has  its 
own  recipes,  many of which work very well and have  no  harmful 
side-effects.

For  the inhalation, take a stainless steel vessel (preferably  a 
vessel  with  a wide mouth) fill it half with water and  add  the 
herbs. After boiling it for a while, remove it from the fire  and 
cover  it.  Drop  a small piece of heated brick (the  size  of  a 
cricket  ball) into the vessel. The water continues to  boil  and 
you  will be able to have a real steam inhalation. It will  clear 
your  sinuses.  It works best if you try  the  inhalation  before 
going to bed. (The brick can be heated on a stove for about 10 to 
15 minutes till it becomes red hot. Use a pair of tongs or a wide 
ladle  to  drop  it into the vessel. Exercise care  to  avoid  an 
accident.

If  you want to do it the traditional way, boil the leaves  in  a 
mud  vessel (the kind that is used in Tamil Nadu to  cook  curry) 
with a wide mouth. The muddy earthy fragrance is pleasant.

For a proper inhalation cover your head and your upper body  with 
a  thick bedsheet or a large towel. With your face not too  close 
to the vessel, inhale deeply through your mouth and nose. Breathe  
properly. An inhalation with herbs once a week keeps those  colds 
at bay.

After  the procedure, pour the water into a bucket, mix  it  with 
cold water and have a bath. It relieves body pain.

Inhalation helps one learn a little more about these herbs. About 
500 medicinal herbs have been listed in the Siddha Materia Medica 
and have been in use in Tamil Nadu for years.

This article will focus on seven herbs which are some of the more 
commonly available types found in South India.

Adhatoda zeylanica (or Adhathodai in Tamil), a common hedge plant 
found  all over South India and in Bengal, grows to a  height  of 
four to 10 feet. Its leaves are like those of the mango tree.  It 
has white flowers. As its name suggests, goats and other  animals 
do  not  eat  its leaves (the  name  Adhathodai  literally  means 
"untouched by goats"). The plant is extremely useful in  treating 
coughs,  colds, wheezing and fevers. The juice and decoction  can 
be taken internally.

The next time you have a cold, try this remedy. Take a few leaves 
of the Adhathodai. Put them in a blender with a little water  and 
extract the juice. Extract the juice of fresh ginger. To one part 
of  Adhathodai juice add 1/2 part of ginger juice.  Mix  together 
and consume about a spoonful. This can be had three to four times 
a  day. Honey can be substituted or added with the ginger  juice. 
Honey  works  better  when it is a wet cough. In case  of  a  dry 
cough,  do  not  use honey. The juice tastes  bitter.  These  are 
excellent remedies which I can personally vouch for.

The  next remedy requires you to make a decoction of the  leaves. 
Boil  Adhathodai leaves in water. In case of a dry cough, boil  a 
few  leaves  in  a cup of water till it evaporates  to  half  the 
volume.  Drink half a cup thrice daily for about a week. In  case 
of a wet cough, add two parts of roughly powdered pippali  (Piper 
nigrum), two or three roughly powdered peppercorns, a small piece 
of dry ginger and proceed as before.

If  you  want to start a herbal garden but are unsure how  to  go 
about  it, the Adhathodai is a good plant to begin with as it  is 
easy  to  grow.  (The  Adhathodai is  used  in  commercial  cough 
syrups.)

Semi-hard  cuttings  of the plant, as thick as a  pencil  can  be 
planted directly or in polybags or pots for propagation. The best 
season  is  April to June. The leaves can be  harvested  in  four 
months time.

Vites negundo or (Nochi in Tamil) is a large aromatic shrub, with 
small  bluish pruple flowers, found throughout India.  There  are 
three types - Venn Nochi, Karu Nochi and Nir Nochi. Venn Nochi is 
the  more commonly seen tree. Nir Nochi is found on the banks  of 
the  Thamiraparani river in Tamil Nadu. The Nochi tree is a  nice  
tree to have in the garden. It is easy to propagate from cuttings 
about two cm thick. It grows wild in rural Tamil Nadu.

A  decoction of Nochi leaves is useful in treating  disorders  of 
the neuro-skeletal and muscular systems. If you have general body 
pain  due to vata disorders, boil the leaves and have a bath.  It 
relieves  body  pain with continuous use. A  decoction  of  Nochi 
leaves and jaggery taken internally relieves vata disorders.

A  paste  made of Nochi leaves and an inch of dried  ginger  when 
applied  on the forehead relieves headaches. Oil made from  Nochi 
juice  relieves chronic headaches associated with sinusitis.  The 
oil  can  be applied on the head and a bath taken an hour  or  so 
later.  The  leaves  can  be  heated  in  a  kadai  and  used  in 
fomentation to relieve muscular pain.

Take equal portions of the juice of Nochi and Thulasi leaves. Add 
powdered  caraway  seeds  (called omam in  Tamil  and  ajwain  in 
Hindi).  A  spoonful can be given to children to  relieve  colic. 
There  are  no  side-effects and can be used  in  treating  "non-
specific" colds, coughs and pains. Wrap four peppercorns, a clove 
and three small cloves of garlic in two leaves of Nochi. Chew  it 
like  paan  and swallow slowly. It  will  relieve  breathlessness 
associated  with  asthma.  Continuous  use  will  also  help   in 
ameliorating asthma.

Leucas aspera or (Thumbe in English) is a weed. The English  name 
closely  resembles the Tamil, Kannada and Malayalam versions  and 
is  probably an adaptation. The plant grows to a height of 15  to 
60 cm. The flowers are small and pure white.

The  leaves and flowers can be used in inhalation.  In  addition, 
two drops of the juice of the flowers is useful as a nasal  drop. 
If taken internally it helps relieve sinus headaches. The  leaves 
can  be cooked with tamarind and are effective in relieving  body 
pain,  and fatigue. Many people can recognise the  Thumbai  plant 
but most do not realise that it is edible.

Thumbai flowers can be boiled in sesame oil and used on the  hair 
before  a  bath.  It is effective  against  migraines  and  nasal 
blocks.

Ocimum sanctum or Thulasi is common in India. The plant grows  to 
a  height of three feet. There are different species,  especially 
in  Tamil  Nadu,  called  Karunthulasi,  Senthulasi,  Naithulasi, 
Nilathulasi, Kalthulasi and Multhulasi.

The leaves are fragrant and an expectorant. Eating them raw helps 
to  relieve  runny  noses and brings down body  heat.  It  is  an 
important  herb  in  both  the Ayurveda  and  Siddha  systems  of 
medicine and is regarded as a protector against Kapha diseases.

The juice of the leaves of Anisochilus carnosus or (Karpooravalli 
in Tamil) is an expectorant. The juice should be boiled till  all 
the  water  evaporates.  Adults can  take  about  a  teaspoonful.  
Children can be given about a quarter teaspoon of the juice  with 
palm  sugar.  The juice can also be boiled with  sesame  oil  and 
applied on the head to prevent cold.

Acalypha  indica  or Kuppaimeni is a weed. It is an  annual  herb 
with numerous ascending branches and grows to about 90 cm. It has 
small  green  flowers.  All parts of the plant  can  be  used  in 
inhalation. The roots and leaves are used to treat skin diseases, 
constipation,  ulcers  and  bronchitis. Take  a  handful  of  the 
leaves, grind with a pinch of salt and a piece of turmeric. Apply 
and  leave on the body for a while before a bath. It is an  anti-
bacterial.

The  neem  tree (Vembu in Tamil) is a symbol of India's  and  the 
world's fight against the bio-piracy of Third World resources. It 
is  found throughout India and is easily recognisable. All  parts 
of the tree have medicinal properties.

Besides being used for inhalation, the leaves are used in medical 
preparations. Powder the dried leaves (both tender and ripe).  To 
one  part  add 1/2 part of powdered caraway seeds with  a  little 
salt. Grind to a paste. It gets rid of skin infections.

The  flowers of the tree are a stimulant and an  excellent  tonic 
having  rejuvenative properties. A chutney can be made  from  the 
dried flowers. Take a handful of dried flowers of the last season 
(you can get this from a traditional medicine store. Clean before 
use).  Fry  it with a little ghee. Fry a few red  chillies  also. 
Take  a  small  quantity  of old tamarind (the  size  of  half  a 
gooseberry)  and  roast it on the fire. Grind everything  with  a 
sprig  of curry leaves and salt. You can change the  quantity  of 
ingredients  according  to taste. The chutney can be  eaten  with 
rice  and ghee or as a side-dish. The dried flowers  improve  the 
appetite, reducing body pain due to vata and get rid of worms.

The time to start using herbal remedies is when you first suspect 
that  you are likely to get a cold or a cough. A  slight  itching 
sensation  in  the  throat,  a few sneezes  and  a  headache  are 
indications.  Herbal remedies work in helping to  strengthen  the 
immune system. 

The first few times you start you may find that the remedies  may 
work  less effectively than you hoped they would.  Give  yourself 
time. Once you stop taking toxic drugs and work on improving your 
resistance, simple remedies will start becoming effective.

The  medicinal  herbs and uses referred to in  this  article  are 
listed in the Siddha And Ayurveda Materia Medica and are all well 
documented  in  the  Government Of India's The  Wealth  Of  India 
series. 
