
Tailored perfection 


The  beauty business is booming. Advertisers and  consumer  goods 
manufacturers   have  joined  hands  to  promote  the  ideal   of 
perfection and are laughing all the way to the bank. Some serious 
questions need to be asked - at what cost do these assembly  line 
beauties attain the perfect smile, glossy hair and flawless  skin 
that make them clones of one another? In an age where empowerment 
is  through  the freedom of choice, surely goals should  be  more 
worthwhile, says VISA RAVINDRAN.

MANY readers, seeing the photograph of the latest Miss World  and 
the  two  runners-up, commented on how similar  the  three  women 
looked.  Small wonder, when their beauty conforms so  closely  to 
prescribed norms that have experts working on their teeth,  hair, 
figure,  posture,  skin  and  presence  including  their   "inner 
beauty".

India  Today's cover story for December 20, 1999,  describes  the 
various  inputs in producing "the complete woman": dentists  push 
the gums up to avoid gummy smiles, align the teeth by sawing  off 
rough  edges,  surgically reshape jaws  and  artificially  whiten 
teeth;  the cosmetic surgeon provides dermabrasion to slough  off 
dead skin, rhinoplasty for sharp and straight noses, surgery  for 
perfect  chins, silicon injections for a sexy pout of  the  lips; 
then comes the fitness expert who creates "a more sculpted  look" 
with  muscle toning and weight training, increases  the  bustline 
with  a  machine that builds up tissue in the  breasts  and  uses 
liposuction to remove flab and then the etiquette teacher  rounds 
off  everything by helping the candidate to be focussed,  achieve 
grace  through dance training and inner beauty  through  mantras, 
meditation  and  Vedic  diets. As fitness expert  Ramma  Bans  is 
reported  to have said, "Today, all a girl needs is  good  height 
and a reasonably pretty face. We can do the rest." "Miss World is 
therefore  a  highly  prized/priced  product  produced  from   an 
assembly  line of highly-skilled body tinkerers with the  support 
of an avid group of advertisers and consumer goods manufacturers. 
While  we shall not discuss here the import of "designer  smiles" 
or the durability of speedily generated inner equilibrium, it  is 
important  to  read  the signals this  whole  industry  sends  to 
others.

April  Eichmeir,  writing on beauty pageants, says,  "What  young 
girls  and women learn from pageants is that success,  happiness, 
intelligence  and  worth requires one to  be  'perfect'  looking. 
Self-esteem  and  self-worth are more  than  appearance."  Cottle 
says,  "You don't have to be a rabid feminist to  understand  the 
downside  of  encouraging females to view nice teeth  and  glossy 
hair  as indicative of a person's worth." Compare this  with  the 
fitness  expert's confident boast - "If a girl can smile  warmly, 
has good eye contact and a glowing aura, you have a winner." With 
India  edging out Venezuela in the beauty sweepstakes,  not  only 
are  all  the  vested  interests delirious  at  the  prospect  of  
continuing to design winning products and raking in the  profits, 
but the desire to win fame and fortune by this route is spreading 
to  smaller  towns and younger generations caught by the  bug  of 
"attaining  beauty".  Becoming  Miss World, an  ad  suggests,  is 
related even to getting lice out of your hair!

The questions that arise are - Do we all want to look alike? When 
so much work and support go into it, what is the winning beauty's 
own contribution? Can people really be taught "inner beauty"  and 
urged "to smell the flowers"? Won't the spending of so much  time 
and  effort  to enhance a natural attribute and turn  it  into  a 
money  spinner divert young minds from more worthwhile  pursuits, 
undermine   their   self  confidence  and   engage   their   time 
inordinately in the pursuit of beauty? Not forgetting older women 
tracing  every  wrinkle on their faces and rushing  off  to  seek 
remedies out of the shiny jars in the supermarkets....

An important element of feminist discourse has been the danger of 
fragmentising  of women's bodies (and of social roles too  though 
that  is  the subject of another article).  Beauty  pageants  and 
advertisements are constantly telling women that their bodies can 
be  fragmented into different areas and worked on to achieve  the 
"right"  shape or size. Commenting on this, Ros Coward says,  "We 
are  set  to work on an ever increasing number of  areas  of  the 
body,  labouring  to  perfect and eroticise  an  ever  increasing 
number  of erotogenic zones. Every minute region of the  body  is 
now  exposed  to this scrutiny by the ideal. Mouth,  hair,  eyes, 
eyelashes, nails, fingers, hands, teeth, lips, cheeks, shoulders, 
arms,  legs,  feet - all these and many more  have  become  areas 
requiring   work.  Each  area  requires  potions,   moisturisers, 
conditioners,  night  creams,  creams  to  cover  up   blemishes. 
Moisturise, display, clean off, rejuvenate - we could well be  at 
it  all day, preparing the face to meet the faces that we  meet." 
The  message  is "measure up or you stand to lose,  you  have  no 
choice."

This  constant urge to rework oneself is multiplied several  fold 
in  aspiring  for  beauty  crowns.  When  empowerment  is   about 
increasing choice, those working towards an artificially  imposed 
ideal  are  moving  towards  a  standardisation  of  looks   that 
militates  against  natural diversity. Surely  there  are  better 
goals than striving, breathless and half-starved, towards willowy 
figures, high cheekbones and pearl-drop nostrils! And the  common 
oblivion  into  which most beauty queens retire  into  should  be 
enough proof of how great a waste all that frenetic effort is for 
a brief moment of doubtful glory. 
