
Harnessing energy for the disabled 


During  her  young days, DR. BLOSSOM RODRIGUEZ used to  hate  the 
life in Kalpakkam, then a forlorn village which housed the Indira 
Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research. ``It was like a prison''.  Two 
decades later, even the slight thought of leaving the place makes 
her  sad.  Eighteen mentally disabled children  and  ``MEHATVA,'' 
where  they  are learning to be independent  ``without  fear  and 
without  being  laughed at'' have become a part of her  life  and 
have made the once-hated township dear to her.

According  to  her,  the  main problem in  the  field  of  mental 
disability  in children is non-acceptance of the  problem.  ``The 
more educated the parent, the more difficult,'' she tells 

G. PRAMOD KUMAR.

Blossom Rodriguez

BEFORE THE Women's Association for Children in Kalpakkam township 
of the Atomic Energy Department started its special school in  an 
``aluminium  hut,'' in 1994, there was absolutely no facility  in 
the  region to help mentally disabled children. Over  the  years, 
the   organisation  has  transformed  itself   into   ``MEHATVA'' 
(Mentally Handicapped Training for Vocational Applications),  and 
has  grown  in size, respectability and expertise.  The  eighteen 
children  at  the  school are now  being  trained  in  functional 
abilities  like  managing their lives without  external  support, 
cooking,  shopping,  cleaning and a series of things,  which  may 
appear simple to the normal world but are capable of changing the 
quality  of their lives for ever. The rationale of the school  is 
therefore simple. ``You have to find activity that will be useful 
to them,'' says Ms. Rodriguez, the force behind the school.

The once ``home-bound'' Ms.Rodriguez, who was more interested  in 
piano, history and archaeology, now finds herself fully  immersed 
in  the  functioning of ``MEHATVA''. ``It has  grown  big,''  she 
says. But that is not enough.

The  number of children admitted at the school hardly  represents 
the  reality and highlights the ``denial'' harboured by  parents. 
Ms.  Rodriguez's main aim is to address this issue. ``The  battle 
we  are facing is non-acceptability''. And this attitude  towards 
the problem can be debilitating in future. 

By  the  time the parents come out of their denial,  it  will  be 
late. Early intervention ``can narrow the gap between the  mental 
age  and chronological age'' and in terms of functional  ability, 
it  really  means a lot for the child. ``If I  hide  my  problem, 
people will talk. If I accept it, nobody will ask anything,'' she 
adds. The Logo of MEHATVA itself is empowering. Women and  child, 
a  glowing sun and the symbol of atomic energy  representing  the 
Department  of  Atomic Energy, which has been a  support  to  the  
organisation.

Though Ms. Rodriguez is grateful to the Nuclear Power Corporation 
(NPC),  35  individuals and the Indira Gandhi Centre  for  Atomic 
Research  (IGCAR)  for their support to the institution,  Dr.  P. 
Jeyachandran,  a  renowned psychologist in the  field  of  mental 
retardation,  deserves  special  mention. He is  a  part  of  the 
institution ``right from prescribing individual programme for our 
students and handpicking our teachers to the design of the school 
building  and  furniture,''  she says.  Similarly,  the  Madhuram 
Narayanan Centre for Exceptional Children in Chennai also extends 
its  professional  expertise  in training  children  with  mental 
disabilities and developmental delays and also professionals  and 
para-professionals.

And  for a change, there is a man behind this  successful  woman: 
her  husband who also shares her interest in music  and  history, 
Dr. Placid Rodriguez, Director, IGCAR.
