
Toss a pancake 


PANCAKES  are  made  out of a batter of eggs, flour  and  milk  - 
cooked  or  fried  in  a thick  frying  pan.  There  are  several 
varieties that can be served for breakfast, lunch, dinner or even 
for brunch. Pancake race is a popular event in Kansas City, U.S.. 
In  this race contestants run almost 400 metres, each carrying  a 
pancake in a skillet. While running, the contestant must toss the 
pancake into the air and catch it in the skillet at least twice.

Broken pancakes (kaiserschmarren)

Ingredients:

Maida 1 cup
Sugar 3 tblsp
Milk 1/2 cup
Butter 2 tblsp. (melted)
Eggs 2 (separated)
Kismis 2 tblsp

To serve:

Butter 1 tblsp.
Castor sugar 2 tbls.

Method:

Put  the flour and sugar in a bowl, add the melted  butter,  milk 
and egg yolk and mix well. Add the stiffly beaten egg whites  and 
kismis.  Pour  into a well buttered hot frying pan  and  let  the 
mixture set and brown on a slow fire taking care not to burn  it. 
When  it is golden brown, turn it over. With two forks  tear  it 
into  irregularly  shaped pieces (the so  called  Schmarren)  and 
continue to cook gently for a couple of minutes. Sprinkle  castor 
sugar and smear with butter before serving.

* * *

Apple pancakes

Ingredients:

Maida 1 cup
Sugar 2 tblsp.
Baking powder 1/2 tsp.
Salt, a pinch
Apples 2 (medium size)
Eggs 2
Cinnammon powder 1/2 tsp.
Oil 1 tblsp.
Butter 2 tblsp.
Castor sugar, to serve 4 tblsp. 

Method

Prepare  the  pancake  batter by sifting  maida,  baking  powder, 
sugar,  salt and cinnammon powder into a bowl. Gradually add  the 
eggs with the oil and milk, beating well to make a smooth batter. 
Peel,  core  and  thinly  slice the apples.  Add  to  the  batter 
mixture, beating well.

Heat a pan and add some butter. Swirl quickly around to coat  the 
base of the pan. Pour about 3-4 tblsp. of the batter and tilt the 
pan  to  coat  the bottom evenly. Cook  until  the  underside  is 
brownfor  three minutes, then turn over and cook for about  10-12 
seconds.  Repeat  with  the  rest of  the  batter,  stacking  the 
pancakes  on  a plate as they are cooked.  Serve  sprinkled  with 
castor sugar.

* * *

Cauliflower pancake

Ingredients:
Maida 1/2 cup
Eggs 2 (optional)
Milk 200 ml.
Cauliflower 100 gms.
Onion 1
Capsicum 1 (optional)
Cheese 25 gms.
Coriander leaves 2 tblsp. (chopped)
Oil 2 tsp.
Salt and pepper according to taste.
Butter to fry the pancake.

Method:

Cut  the  onion  and capsicum into small  pieces  and  grate  the 
cauliflower. Heat the oil in a pan and saute the onions. Put  the 
capsicum and mix well. Add the cauliflower and stir. Put salt and 
pepper powder according to taste. Remove from fire after  cooking 
for  2-3  minutes. Mix maida, beaten eggs and  milk.  Add  grated 
cheese,  chopped coriander leaves and cauliflower mix.  And  salt 
and pepper and mix well without any lumps.

Heat  butter in a pan. Pour a ladle of pancake batter.  When  one 
side is done, smear a little butter and cook the other side also. 
Repeat with the rest of the batter.

Serve with sauce or chutney. This pancake should be thick.

Note: If eggs are not used, 250 ml milk should be used.

* * *

Orange pancake 

Ingredients

Maida 100 gm.
Egg 1
Butter 1 tblsp.
Milk 1/2 cup
Orange juice 2 tblsp.
Salt to taste
For the filling:
Butter 3 tblsp.
Grated coconut 3 tblsp.
Orange essence 1/4 tsp.
Orange colouring few drops
Icing sugar 6 tblsp.
For topping:
Castor sugar 3 tblsp 
For garnishing
Orange segments, few pieces

Method

Mix  the juice and sugar and simmer on slow fire till  the  sugar 
melts. Remove and keep aside.

Sieve  the flour. Separate yolk and white and beat the yolk.  Add 
milk,  orange juice and salt. Gradually add the flour and make  a 
batter.  Beat egg white till stiff and add to the batter and  mix 
well. Add half a cup of water and make a thin batter.

Beat  butter, add icing sugar and beat till smooth. Add  coconut, 
orange essence and colouring.

Heat a small frying pan and dot with butter. Make a thin  pancake 
by  pouring  three to four tablespoons of batter. Cook  both  the 
sides and remove to a plate. Repeat with the rest of the  batter. 
Take a pancake and spread some orange filling and roll it up.

Arrange the pancakes in an ovenproof dish. Sprinkle castor  sugar 
over the top and grill it for a few minutes till the sugar melts. 
Serve it hot garnished with orange segments.

* * *

Pancake with coconut filling

Ingredients:

Maida 1 cup
Egg 1
Milk 250 ml.
Sugar 1 tblsp.
Salt, a pinch
Ghee for frying
For the filling: 

Grated coconut 3 tblsp.
Sugar 2 tblsp.
Cashewnuts 5-6
Cardamom powder 1/4 tsp. Mix them and cut into small pieces.

Method:

Sieve  together  maida and salt. Add beaten egg  yolk,  milk  and 
sugar.  Beat well to form a smooth batter. Whisk the  egg  whites 
and fold into the batter.

Heat a little ghee in a frying pan. 

Pour in sufficient batter to cover the bottom of the pan thinly. 

Cook  till light brown. Put in the filling and roll. Remove  from 
fire. Repeat with the rest of the batter. 

LEILA KAMALUDDIN
