
The way ahead 


Relations between India and China nose-dived after 1962, a  phase 
examined  by  C.V.RANGANATHAN and VINOD C. KHANNA in  their  book 
India  And  China: The Way Ahead After 'Mao's India War',  to  be 
released  tomorrow. By examining mutual misconceptions  prevalent 
at  that  point  of  time, they examine  the  degree  of  charged 
emotions  that  have marked the discussions  on  the  contentious 
border dispute. The challenge before India today, they say, is to 
develop  a  balanced  relationship with China  and  drop  extreme 
conclusions  on the state of Sino-Pakistan  relations.  Exclusive 
extracts.

THERE  are  diverse  images of China  in  India,  reflecting  the 
plurality  of views in Indian society. At one extreme  are  those 
who see China as incorrigibly aggressive and expansionist, posing 
a perennial threat to India. At the other extreme, are those  who 
perceive it as a benign neighbour, a sister ancient civilisation, 
more  sinned against than sinning in modern times. But the  great 
majority  of Indians seems to carry in their minds a  more  mixed 
picture,  with  both  positive  and  negative  ingredients,   the 
dominance  of  one  or the other often depending  on  the  latest 
developments. One thing is clear: 1962 has left a lasting scar on 
the Indian psyche.

Many  influential  Indian analysts in the fields of  defence  and 
foreign  affairs  project  an image of a  muscular  China,  which 
respects  power  more  than  any  other  factor  and  with   whom 
negotiations  can  succeed only if India is seen  to  be  equally 
strong.   Following  China's  rapid  economic  growth   and   the 
consequent  availability of larger resources for  augmenting  its 
military  strength, the images of an assertive China  which  will 
pose  a  serious threat to Indian security, to  Indian  interests 
with  neighbours and in the Indian Ocean areas have  got  further 
magnified.  Examples  from  India's experience  of  dealing  with 
China,  its assistance to Pakistan in nuclear weapon and  missile 
fields,  its  links  with  the  Myanmar  military,  the  hitherto 
unchanged  attitude  over Sikkim's integration  with  India,  are 
cited  as  evidence  of  a  China  which  continues  to   harbour 
malevolent  intentions towards India. Other analysts,  while  not 
sharing  the  foregoing assessment completely, do  conclude  that 
China  does not deal with India as an equal partner and  that  it 
seeks   to  perpetuate  an  hierarchical  international   system, 
presided over by the veto-wielding five permanent members of  the 
Security Council, who have also proclaimed themselves as the sole 
legitimate nuclear weapon powers into an indefinite future.

The multipolar world, which China claims to foster, some contend, 
is  intended  to  be  dominated by the  Five,  perhaps  with  the 
addition  of  Japan and Germany. China's  strident  criticism  of 
India's  nuclear  tests is held up as proof of China  seeking  to 
thwart  India's pursuit of its legitimate security needs. On  the 
basis  of such an analysis, it is argued that China will use  its  
military  superiority,  hostile  linkages with  some  of  India's 
neighbours, and strategic partnership with the U.S. to pressurise 
India   into   surrendering  its  vital  interests.   Like   most 
generalities, all of these have grains of plausibility.  However, 
India's  policy  towards China cannot be based  solely  on  worst 
possible  assumptions, just as it cannot be based on a return  to 
the  innocence  of  the  Hindi-Chini  bhai  bhai  period.  Indian 
interests  would be better served by a more balanced approach  to 
the complex reality that is China.

To  be  sure,  the Chinese, at  policy,  advisory,  military  and 
official levels, also have similarly exaggerated images of India. 
However, at least as far as public presentation is concerned,  we 
do not see the kind of diversity in China that can be observed in 
democratic  India. China's negative perceptions of  India,  which 
find  articulation  whenever  bilateral  relations   deteriorate, 
include  the following: the 1962 armed conflict was entirely  the 
product  of Indian unreasonableness and aggressiveness, India  is 
not  fully reconciled to the situation in Tibet,  notwithstanding 
its stated policy of recognising Tibet as an autonomous region of 
China,  India is seeking domination of South Asia, such as  would 
preclude  China  from pursuing its legitimate  interests  in  its 
neighbourhood.  India is a poor country but its leaders,  instead 
of solving its economic problems, seek to maximise military power 
in   pursuit  of  their  "hegemonic"  objectives  and  India   is 
deliberately using the myth of a Chinese threat to find a pretext 
for  its nuclear ambitions. In fairness it should  be  recognised 
that  public  remarks  by Indian ministers  about  occupation  of 
Indian  territory  by  China, or about Taiwan  or  Tibet,  reopen 
"hurt"  feelings  on  the  Chinese  side.  Finally,  there  is  a 
continuity   in   Chinese   obtuseness   in   understanding   the 
complexities   of  India's  plural  democracy,  with   its   free 
expression of views which do not always represent the policies of 
the  government.  While  showing  increasing  sophistication  and 
finesse  in coping with the system in the U.S., the Chinese  have 
been slower in understanding India's democracy.

Popular  images  are, of course, vulnerable to  manipulation.  It 
would  be  naive  to  suggest  that  this  does  not  happen   in 
democracies  like  India.  However, with  some  rare  exceptions, 
Indian  scholars enjoy a much greater freedom of  expression.  In 
China, official controls apart, the scholars still exercise self-
censorship  when it comes to public expression, and  particularly 
if the issue is a sensitive one. The manner in which one  Chinese 
specialist  after  another  was  quoted  by  the  Chinese   media 
repeating the official line regarding the Indian nuclear tests of 
May 1998 was a recent example of this. It contrasted sharply with 
the position in India, where opposition political  personalities, 
intellectuals and leading newspaper commentators, including  many 
who  supported the nuclear tests, criticised the  government  for 
the  manner in which it had named China in public defence of  its 
decision.

In  the  years preceding the nuclear tests, China  had,  however, 
clearly  scored over India in one respect: many  Chinese  leaders  
belonging to the highest echelons had personally visited India in 
the  last  decade.  This  indicated  a  political  consensus  and 
continuity  in attaching importance to developing relations  with 
India, despite the unresolved problems. Investment was thus being 
made in the relationship with India in one of the most  effective 
ways  known  in China's culture and in her  practice  of  foreign 
policy,   namely,  structuring  relations  through   high   level 
political exchanges. The vagaries of our coalition politics  seem 
to  have stymied reciprocity from India in sustaining high  level 
governmental political contacts.

If we look at the post-1978 period, the most important change  in 
China's   domestic  politics  was  the  transition  from   Maoist 
radicalism to Dengist pragmatic moderation. The sweeping economic 
reforms  at  home were accompanied by a new approach  to  foreign 
policy,  which  was  now required to make  the  maximum  possible 
contribution  to  economic development. The primacy  accorded  to 
economic  growth  logically necessitated working for  a  peaceful 
international environment. So, there is nothing cynical about the 
recurring  Chinese assertion that peace and development  are  two 
top priorities in the world today.

Particular  effort  has  been  made  to  improve  relations  with 
neighbours.  Thus land borders have been successfully  negotiated 
with  almost every neighbour. Where it has not been  possible  to 
resolve an issue peacefully, China has been willing to shelve it. 
China's relations with Vietnam and India have been major examples 
of this approach in recent times. However, like any major  power, 
the  Chinese are not willing to surrender or compromise  on  what 
they consider to be their legitimate interests and  entitlements. 
The  strident  display of military might during  the  March  1996 
crisis  across  the Taiwan Straits  announced  China's  continued 
willingness  to use force to back what it has declared to be  its 
irreducible  vital interest. The point is that China's  behaviour 
on  the international stage, even when hard  and  uncompromising, 
does not follow some erratic, inexplicable path.

There is little doubt that it is China's ambition to acquire even 
greater  influence  in  world affairs. It  regards  this  as  its 
historical,  cultural  and demographic entitlement.  It  is  also 
willing  to work to earn its place at the top table. The  Dengist 
revolution  is premised on the assumption that this place can  be 
better  achieved  through economic growth and  modernisation  and 
this would not only improve the welfare of the Chinese people and 
guarantee  domestic political stability, but would  also  enhance 
China's   international   standing.   The   Chinese   say    that 
international politics today is characterised by "the competition 
for  comprehensive  national power", which is  a  combination  of 
military, political, economic and technological strengths.  China 
feels  America alone can delay or even thwart what China sees  as 
its  natural entitlement, can use militant and economic tools  to 
do so, and is the sole hegemonic power seeking global domination. 
Therefore  it is an important goal of China's foreign  policy  to 
make  common  cause with other powers actual and potential  -  in 
opposing such domination. 

However,  given its economic and technological backwardness,  and 
the  scale of its problems at home, China is not about to  become 
an  equal of the U.S. in power terms in the near future. Even  if 
we  accept  that the Chinese GNP will become the largest  in  the 
coming decades, the per capita income will still remain very low, 
and  the  surplus available to the state for  projecting  China's 
power   abroad   would   not   go   up   dramatically.   However, 
notwithstanding  all these caveats, the fact remains  that  China 
has  already emerged as an influential and powerful  nation,  and 
will clearly become even more so in coming years.

What does all this mean for Sino-Indian relations? Today, in  one 
way  or  another,  all major powers seek to pursue  a  policy  of 
"constructive  engagement" or even "strategic  partnership"  with 
China  because they realise that this is in their  own  political 
and  economic  interest.  None  of  them  surrender  their  vital 
interests  in  the  process.  They  seek  to  negotiate  mutually 
beneficial  solutions  to problems. This quest  does  not  always 
succeed,  but  the  danger  of  conflict  is  minimised  and   of 
cooperation to mutual advantage enhanced. There is no reason  why 
India should not be pursuing the same route.

There  are  some  analysts who seem to believe  that  the  rising 
Chinese power presents some sort of a unique challenge to  Indian 
aspirations.   They   refer   to   China's   undoubted   military 
superiority;  and some of them combine this with the  much  cited 
proposition  of the ancient Chinese strategist, Sun Zi  that  "to 
win without fighting is the acme of skill". But the importance of 
Sun  Zi's  classic, Art of War, goes beyond the insights  it  may 
give  into  contemporary Chinese military thinking.  It  contains 
some universally applicable principles, and should be  compulsory 
reading  for diplomats and military strategists alike. The  moves 
he recommends are not a Chinese monopoly, nor are they mysterious 
prescriptions, which others cannot follow to their benefit.

An ability to protect and promote your country's vital  interests 
in  the  face  of  the superior military  power  of  a  potential 
adversary is one of the defining features of successful diplomacy 
by  any  country,  other  than  the  strongest.  It  is  not  the 
contention  of the authors that capabilities are  not  important, 
nor that they are less important than intentions. But to them  it 
is  common  sense  that capabilities and intentions  have  to  be 
considered in tandem. It is true that intentions can change,  but 
it  is not necessary that they change for the worse;  they  could 
also change for the better. Indeed, that is the premise on  which 
foreign  policy and diplomacy are based. There must  be  constant 
endeavour  to ensure that the intentions of a country  which  has 
the capability to threaten one's security in fact change for  the 
better.  Intelligent foreign policy further requires that such  a 
network of relationships be built that, should the intentions  of 
a potential adversary change for the worse, it would be  possible 
to  draw on the reservoir of relationships with powers which  can 
countervail  the threat. Equally, it is necessary to build  up  a 
network  of  relationships  covering  diverse  fields  with   the  
potential  adversary,  so that vested interests are built  up  in 
each  country  which would act as moderating  factors  if  things 
turned out for the worse.

The possibility that the intentions of governments may change for 
the  better  is  as important as the  fear  of  their  worsening. 
Starting in the early Eighties, Deng was able to alter the nature 
of the U.S.-Soviet Union-China strategic triangle, in which China 
had  become  heavily dependent on U.S. because of  the  perceived 
threat  from a Soviet Union which was very much stronger at  that 
time.  He  made a fresh evaluation of the nature  of  the  Soviet 
threat and downgraded it even though there had been no change  in 
the Sino-Soviet military balance. Indian strategic thinkers could 
also  attempt  a fresh look at the nature  of  so-called  Chinese 
"threat"  by  taking into account the basic  fact  that,  despite 
undoubted  superior  military capability -  including  a  nuclear 
advantage  - China has made no significant military move  against 
India  in  the  last  37 years. To  base  policy  on  worst  case 
assumptions  cannot always be equated with realism. It  could  be 
counter-productive.

Of course, a country of India's size and aspirations must have  a 
certain  minimum credible capability of her own. But it does  not 
need  to attempt military parity with China, for that would  only 
drag  it  into the kind of ruinous course  which  bankrupted  the 
Soviet  Union. Indian strategic thinkers quite rightly point  out 
that  the  defence requirements of India and Pakistan  cannot  be 
equated,  as  India  has also to enter  other  factors  into  its 
calculations,  such  as  its long borders and  coast  lines,  and 
China. By the same token it is useful for us to keep in mind  the 
security  environment confronting China. It is the  only  country 
which  has  been subjected to nuclear threat by both  the  United 
States  and  the erstwhile Soviet Union. It  has  more  immediate 
neighbours  than  any other country except Russia.  Of  these  at 
least  five, seen from Beijing's perspective, would fall  in  the 
category  of "potential threats" - Japan, Russia, Vietnam,  India 
and Taiwan - though its Defence Minister may not be as indiscreet 
as  George Fernandes in publicly identifying them as such. If  to 
this  you  add  the fact that after the collapse  of  the  Soviet 
Union,  much  of  U.S. strategic thinking came  to  be  based  on 
identifying   China  as  a  major  long  term   adversary,   then 
objectively it must be admitted that China has to contend with  a 
very  complex  external  security environment.  It  is  therefore 
somewhat  misleading  to  compare India and  China  on  a  simple 
one-to-one basis.

To  keep arguing that China seeks to confine India into  a  South 
Asian  straitjacket  misses a fundamental point. Whether  or  not 
India  becomes a global actor depends on India alone. This  would 
require a combination of political cohesion, economic prosperity, 
social  justice,  adequate military  capability  and  intelligent 
diplomacy. It is not a status anybody - not even China - can deny 
India. But, alas by the same token, no one is gratuitously  going 
to confer it on India, not even her smallest neighbour. If in the 
years  ahead, India fails to promote its interests on a  regional  
or  global level this will be due to its domestic and  diplomatic 
failures. Any Chinese role in this will be marginal.

This is particularly true of South Asia. As our study shows,  the 
simple fact is that China is just not in the same class as  India 
as  far as the long-term needs and interests of our  South  Asian 
neighbours  are concerned. The facts of geography,  culture,  and 
ethnicity, reinforced by economic compulsions, tie their  destiny 
much more with India than with China. So long as these  countries 
do  not  perceive  India either as  seeking  to  exert  hegemonic 
pressure on them, or, at the other extreme, of being politically, 
economically and militarily too weak to be of consequence,  there 
is no reason for them to turn to China in any manner inimical  to 
Indian interests. If one looks back to the Sixties, as our  study 
shows,  fears  that China will roll down the South  Asian  plains 
from the Himalayan kingdoms had been utterly exaggerated.

It  is true that Pakistan is still an exception to these  general 
propositions  about  South Asia. Two extreme conclusions  on  the 
state  of  Sino-Pakistan relations need to be avoided:  one  that 
China  would  abandon Pakistan for the sake  of  friendship  with 
India, and the other that Sino-Pakistani relations are invariably 
aimed against the interests of India. In the past, doubtless, the 
Chinese  were responsible for fostering certain  illusions  about 
the  extent  or quality of their support to  Pakistan,  when  the 
latter engaged in armed conflicts with India. This  circumstance, 
as we have seen in an earlier chapter, has changed qualitatively.

The present situation is characterised by complex factors,  which 
China  needs  to  take into account  in  maintaining  an  overall 
balance  in the conduct of its relations with both  Pakistan  and 
India. These are, first, China would not like to see a  situation 
of  permanent hostility between India and Pakistan,  worse  still 
armed conflicts, or situations where China is called upon to take 
sides. Second, China does not want an internationalisation of the 
Kashmir  dispute,  because  such a situation  affects  China  and 
promotes,  as  she  fears,  Western  intervention,   particularly 
American,  on  her periphery. The experience of Iraq  and  Kosovo 
leaves  China  most uncomfortable in spite of being  a  permanent 
member of the Security Council. Third, China cannot but be  alive 
to  the  variety of threats posed  by  religious  fundamentalism, 
armed  terrorism  and  spread  of narcotics  to  the  social  and 
political  fabric  of  its sensitive border  regions.  There  are 
shared  Sino-Indian interests in dealing with  these  challenges, 
which are also a source of serious concern to Russia, the Central 
Asian states and Western countries. Be that as it may, the  truth 
of  the  matter is that we have to improve  relations  with  both 
China and Pakistan.

From the above we would infer that India-China relations are  not 
an  all-or-nothing  proposition, but a mixed bag of  issues  with 
varying degrees of solvability. Insofar as the roles of China and 
India on the larger international stage are concerned, with a few 
difficult  exceptions,  such as  nuclear  non-proliferation,  the 
interests of China and India need not inevitably clash in future.  

Even  where  it is unrealistic to expect that there would  be  an 
identity  of views on how each looks at the world, it  should  be 
possible  for  these two most populous nations of  the  world  to 
pursue  their  respective interest within  a  larger  cooperative 
framework. What India needs is self-confidence and not  paranoia. 
India is too great a nation to kowtow to anybody; but by the same 
token, it must behave with the maturity of a major power, capable 
of  interacting  in  a  balanced and  rational  manner  with  the 
international   community,  even  where  our  interests  do   not 
coincide. 

Extracted  from  : India and China, The Way Ahead,  After  'Mao's 
India War', Chapter IX, C. V. Ranganathan and V. C. Khanna,  Har-
Anand  Publications  Pvt. Ltd., D-9, Anand  Niketan,  New  Delhi-
110021, Rs. 295.
