
The ideal husband 


IN  one of his columns, American humorist, Art Buchwald  lamented 
that  American  wives lacked certain qualities  of  the  Japanese 
women.  According  to Buchwald, no U.S. wife would agree  to  lie 
down on the floor so that the husband will first step down on her 
while  getting out of bed. Unlike American women, Japanese  wives 
considered it their duty to bathe their husbands and argued  that 
a family which bathed together, stayed together.

Comparisons  are  odious  but husbands of  any  era  quite  often 
compared their own position and status at home with that of their 
fathers.  The conclusion? The husbands of the earlier  generation 
were better looked after by their wives. My wife, no doubt, takes 
excellent  care of me but then it is I who gets up first  in  the 
mornings  and makes the tea or coffee. This never happened to  my 
father.

Times  change and it is of no use to hark back to the past.  When 
my father was getting ready to leave for office, it was my mother 
who  saw  to  it  that his shirt was  tucked  properly  into  his 
trousers.  After that, she was ready with a glass of water and  a 
plateful  of  "vethalai, paakku and sunnambu" (betel  leaves  and 
accessories).   As  soon  as  Tamil  magazines  like  Kalki   and 
Anandavikatan  arrived,  it was she who read out the  stories  to 
father. I do not enjoy these privileges.

I  guess the men of those generations were lucky to have  been  a 
pampered lot. Husbands were the unchallenged lords and masters of 
their homes. 

This  supremacy  was  all  the more evident in  the  case  of  my 
grandfather  who  left no doubt as to who was the master  of  the 
house.  The  wife's duty was to cook, serve the  food,  keep  the 
house  clean  and see to it that the husband was  kept  happy  in 
every  possible way. Whenever grandmother talked to us about  her 
life,  the  main topic of her narrative was how  she  cooked  and 
served hot food to her husband even when accompanying him on some 
of his official tours.

The  husbands  lived like kings. They would not  throw  away  the 
banana peels after eating the fruit. The wife had to do that.  It 
was never expected that they would take away the coffee  tumblers 
and  put them away in the kitchen sink. Washed clothes were  kept 
ready  as soon as the husbands came out after their  bath.  These 
privileges  were  taken for granted. The wives had to be  at  the 
beck  and  call  of their  husbands.  Grandmother  left  abruptly 
whatever  she  was doing and rushed to  grandfather  whenever  he 
called her, which happened every three and a half minutes. If she 
was late by half a minute, she had to listen to a lecture on  the 
duties of the pathivrata siromanis of the past. The prime example 
was the wife of Tiruvallavur, the poet. Once when the poet called 
out, the wife was drawing water from the well. She left the  rope  
hanging  mid-way  and rushed to her husband. On  her  return  she 
found that the rope and the vessel were still hanging in mid  air 
exactly as she had left them.

The women of the earlier generations had to be versatile  because 
the  demands  of the husbands were varied.  Grandmother's  duties 
included  reading aloud chapters from the epics  daily,  checking 
Vanoli  (the  magazine brought out by All India  Radio)  for  the 
day's radio programmes, opening the tops of the various  medicine 
bottles,  supervising  the  daily oil massage  routine  and  also 
providing  the husband with a bit of village gossip. As  soon  as 
grandmother  returned  from  the temple every  evening,  she  was 
questioned,  "Endi, innaiku kovil le yarellam pondugal  vandaal?" 
(Who  were the women folk at the temple today?). The  reply  came 
with  enthusiasm, "Narayani, Subbalakshmi,  Kamakshi,  Tailambal, 
Ambujam."

There were rare exceptions to this rule. One of our neighbours at 
Tambaram,  a Chennai suburb, who was working with the Indian  Air 
Force,  always  entered  the  home  through  the  kitchen   while 
returning  from work. He changed clothes in the  kitchen,  cooked 
the food, cleaned up the utensils and finished the other  chores. 
What  was the wife doing? Preparing for the evening  bhajans  and 
gossip sessions.

Times are changing and some of today's husbands are quite keen to 
help out with the household work. At home, besides making tea  in 
the morning, I take care of the washing, folding the clothes  and 
do  much  of the shopping. Unfortunately, I still  can't  cook  a 
single  dish. But looking around I still observe plenty  of  men, 
who  continue  to think of themselves as  supreme  masters  whose 
every wish is an order to their wives. Such a trend is encouraged 
by  most  mothers.  Their darling sons must be  pampered  to  the 
fullest. I am happy when my wife tells our friends how I help her 
out  in domestic chores. "Oh, it is so wonderful  and  romantic," 
some  of  the  friends gush. "I thought you were  all  the  time, 
reading or writing. Isn't that what all intellectuals did?" Well, 
I seldom bother to correct these impressions. I mean, about being 
an  "intellectual"  or  there  being  anything  "romantic"  about 
household chores.

I can't tolerate disorder in the house. I want things to be  kept 
in  their  normal  places.  This did not  happen  in  my  teenage 
daughter's room. But at least, the rest of the house can be taken 
care  of and kept tidy. And if my efforts in this direction  earn 
me some praise, well, I am happy. 

V. GANGADHAR
