
Lasers in the theatre 


OVER  the  past four decades, the laser has evolved to  become  a 
precise   and   powerful   weapon   in   the   modern   surgeon's 
armamentarium.

Let  us  look  at the past. As early  as  1917,  Albert  Einstein 
predicted   that  ordinary  Light  could  be  Amplified  by   the 
Stimulated  Emission of Radiation, and hence the  acronym  LASER. 
However, Einstein died five years short of seeing his  prediction 
come true. But he did witness the construction of the first MASER 
(Microwave Amplification by the Stimulated Emission of Radiation) 
in  1954, in the (erstwhile) USSR. It was in 1960  that  Theodore 
Maiman successfully worked the first laser. This opened the doors 
for a series of lasers to be discovered.

There  are several types of lasers, depending on the  medium  and 
the  chemical  constituents.  Essentially,  a  laser  beam  is  a 
monochromatic  (single colour wavelength), parallel and  coherent 
packet  (or quantum) of rays, made up of a variety of  molecules. 
The CO2 (carbon dioxide) laser is one such laser; it has very low 
penetration, and is useful for the removal of superficial lesions 
of the skin, like warts.

The  ND:YAG  laser  (Neodymium, Ytrium  -  Aluminium  Garnet)  is 
probably  the  most useful and versatile laser in the  fields  of 
general  surgery and gastroenterology because of its  ability  to 
coagulate  (clot) bleeding points. Today, its  applications  have 
extended to dermatology, neurosurgery, gynaecology, ophtalmology, 
urology and vascular surgery.

The Argon laser is another, albeit less useful, tool in  surgical 
procedures.

Effects  of  lasers:  The main uses are  related  to  their  bio-
physical properties.

Low  energy  lasers (power output less than 100mw and  an  energy 
density  less  than  50mw/sq cm) have  biological  effects  which 
include activation of bio-chemical reactions and the  stimulation 
of  biological  tissues. This stimulation is helpful  in  healing 
wounds  and  welding  tissues, (including the  joining  of  small 
vessels and nerves) in dentistry.

The  biological  effects  of high energy  lasers  are  even  more 
dramatic.  The  ability to concentrate a very high  intensity  of 
rays  at  that  focal  point is  of  fundamental  importance  for 
therapeutic purposes. Most tissues have a high water content, and 
this  leads  to a very marked absorption of  infrared  radiation. 
This causes heating of tissues. For example, to study the  ND:YAG 
laser's  effect  on tissues, its wavelength of 1,064  nm  has  an 
affinity  for the red part of the colour spectrum.  Hence,  areas 
that  bleed,  attract  and concentrate  this  laser,  which  then  
stanches the bleeding by a coagulation process that involves  the 
denaturation of proteins.

Slow  heating  of a large volume of tissue around  the  point  of 
impingement  of  radiation  occurs,  followed  by  deep,   slowly 
progressive  coagulation. The tissue volume covered by the  laser 
light  is  heated, which results in delayed  destruction  of  the 
tissue,  with  no  noticeable structural damage.  At  the  tissue 
surface,  vaporisation  occurs,  leading  to  marked   shrinking, 
although the surface itself is hardly damaged. This is the  basis 
of the action of the laser on haemorrhoids (piles). Blood vessels 
are  sealed  by  the combined effect  of  shrinkage  and  uniform 
coagulation of tissue.

Uses  of lasers: These beams can be used directly on  tissues  or 
through  endoscopes.  For example, CO2 lasers are  excellent  for 
superficial warts as there is direct action. Haemorrhoids can  be 
very   efficiently   dealt  with  by  direct   application.   For 
application  inside the gastro-intestinal tract, laser beams  are 
delivered through the endoscopic channel, to attack, for example, 
bleeding  lesions three or four feet away from the body  surface, 
within the colon (large gut) or stomach.

Clinical   applications  of  lasers:  There  are  two  areas   of 
gastroenterology where lasers are extremely useful:

(a) Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding: Bleeding from the GI tract is 
classified  into  upper GI bleeding, i.e.  from  the  oesophagus, 
stomach and duodenum, or lower GI bleeding, i.e. from the  colon, 
or the rectum. Upper GI bleeding, in turn, can be due to  varices 
which   are  dilated  veins  in  the  gullet,  found  in   portal 
hypertension,  or  due  to ulcers that erode the  lining  of  the 
stomach  and  penetrate  into  underlying  blood  vessels.  "Non-
variceal" or "ulcer" bleeders are in this group.

A  frightening emergency of devastating proportions, GI  bleeding 
causes death in minutes to hours if left unattended. Endoscopy is 
done  as soon as possible, in order to differentiate between  the 
variceal and non-variceal types. If bleeding is due to a spurting 
ulcer,  then laser photo-coagulation, through an  endoscope,  can 
arrest  it immediately. Other causes of bleeding could be due  to 
an  abnormal bunch of blood vessels in the stomach or  the  small 
intestine  called Angiodysplasia which can also bleed  profusely. 
These  are imminently and best treated by laser  photocoagulation 
through the working channel of the endoscope. Stomach tumours can 
also bleed, but can be controlled by laser treatment.

Bleeding from the rectum, (often seen in piles), can sometimes be 
profuse. There is good news for millions of sedentary Indians who 
are  (literally) sitting on their piles. Piles (or  haemorrhoids) 
are  dilated veins on the walls of the terminal part of the  gut, 
close  to  the anal verge, which are the most  common  causes  of 
rectal bleeding. There are as many treatments for piles as  there 
are  physicians  smiting the eyes, from pamphlets  to  cable  TV. 
Probably, the best method of curing piles, especially early ones,  
is the application of the ND:YAG laser on to the pile mass, which 
is  done  as  an  out-patient  procedure.  It  is  painless   and 
inexpensive.  The treatment has revolutionised the management  of 
this common and troublesome problem.

Another  cause for lower GI bleeding, especially in the  elderly, 
is  angiodysplasia  (described earlier) in the  large  intestine. 
These  are first identified by doing an endoscopy  (colonoscopy). 
Using  a bare laser fibre (which can be passed through a  working 
channel  in  the  colonoscope)  these  bleeding  lesions  can  be 
photocoagulated.  This  way,  one  can  avoid  undergoing   major 
surgery, which not so long ago, would have been unavoidable.

(b):  GI  cancers:  Another area where  lasers  have  shown  good 
results are in GI tract cancers - both in the upper and lower  GI 
tract.  Some cancers block the gastrointestinal  lumen  (passage) 
leading to dysphagia (the inability to swallow) when it is in the 
oesophagus,  or  constipation or obstruction to  the  passage  of 
stools,  when  it is in the lower GI tract.  These  cancers  grow 
within the lumen of the GI tract and gradually block the passage. 
Using the laser fibre through the endoscope, these extra  growths 
of the tumour are burnt out thus creating a clear pathway for the 
food (if the cancer is in the food pipes or oesophagus) or  stool 
(if  the tumour had obstructed the lower most part of the gut  or 
rectum).  This permits us to palliate these often terminally  ill 
patients  and gives them the dignity of swallowing  normally  and 
pass  stools  through  the natural passage.  This  is  especially 
useful  in  patients who are not fit enough or are  too  old  for 
surgery  or in whom the cancer is too advanced and widespread  to 
be  considered for any other kind of radical or major surgery  or 
treatment.  In  the upper GI tract, obstructing  tumours  of  the 
stomach  and oesophagus are the most common problems to be  dealt 
with  in  this  way, and in the lower GI  tract,  in  obstructing 
tumours  of  the  rectum and colon. Most  patients  have  lasting 
relief, with one or two such sessions of laser treatment.

From  the  fertile imagination of an inspired mind rose  an  idea 
which  has  fructified into reality in the hands  of  the  modern 
surgeon, allowing him to extend this range of complex  procedures 
on the body, with a minimal amount of tissue damage. 

Dr. J. S. RAJKUMAR
