
Promises and perils 


Little   is   known   about  the   long-term   effects   of   new 
agrotechnologies  on  health and environment.  With  the  growing 
commercialisation of genetically modified crops, public  distrust 
of such products is increasing and people have begun  questioning 
whether technology should tamper with nature. But, asks HARIPRIYA 
RAMADOSS, should resistance to science and technology be  allowed 
to harden into a rejection of its real future benefits?

WOULD  you  like  your  carnation to be  violet  instead  of  the 
conventional rosy-pink? Or maybe even an exotic black? Or,  would 
you prefer roses to be truly blue? These questions are no  longer 
idly  speculative.  Violet carnations are all set  to  enter  the 
American and European markets. The flowers have been developed by 
Melbourne-based  Florigene with a gene from petunias  that  makes 
them violet. Through genetic engineering, Florigene has  produced 
several flowers with novel bluish violet hues that are impossible 
to  achieve through conventional plant hybridisation. In  effect, 
Florigene  has created a new species of carnations and is  trying 
to extend the feat to blue roses as well.

Not  everybody  is happy about this development. The  most  vocal 
protests  are  expected to come from environmentalists  who  fear 
that genetic material from these strange new blooms might pose  a 
danger to other plants in their environment. Of late,  scientists 
and "green" activists have been at loggerheads over the emergence 
of new agrotechnologies.

Today, with the growing commercialisation of genetically modified 
(GM)  crops,  the public is hard put to  answer  certain  crucial 
questions.  Is biotechnology a boon or bane for agriculture?  Can 
GM  crops boost food production? Or are they products of  a  risk 
technology  that should not be allowed to tamper with nature?  In 
Europe   the  timetable  set  by  government  and  industry   for 
introducing GM crops is being rescheduled because such  questions 
strongly  urge  a  re-evaluation of the promises  and  perils  of 
biotechnology.

The  impact of new agrotechnologies on the daily life  of  people 
lends  piquancy  to  the problem. The last  decade  of  the  20th 
century  saw  a spurt in the biotechnology  industry,  with  many 
genetically  engineered foods finding their way to shop  shelves. 
Although this happens only after comprehensive scientific reviews 
and  regulatory measures (such as those under the purview of  the 
U.S.  Food  and Drug Administration) have pronounced  them  safe, 
public  distrust  of such products is growing.  The  reason:  Too 
little  is  known  about their long term effects  on  health  and 
environment.

This  was  the thrust of a report published in  Nature  (27  May, 
1999)   on  genetically  engineered  corn.  Researchers  at   the 
Department  of  Entomology,  Cornell  University,  suggest   that  
Monarch  butterflies  could  be at risk  from  eating  transgenic 
pollen.  Because  corn pollen from Bt. Corn plants  (plants  made 
resistant   by  transforming  with  genetic  material  from   the 
bacterium  Bacillus  thuringiensis or Bt.) is dispersed  over  at 
least  60  metres  by wind, they can be  ingested  by  non-target 
organisms  that  consume  plants on  which  they  are  deposited. 
Although  Bt. is considered the farmer's friend, and  the  spores 
are used to spray on other plants even in organic farm  practice, 
researchers  fear  that it might represent a  threat  to  Monarch 
butterflies in their natural environment. A lab assay showed that 
Monarch  larvae  suffer a higher mortality rate  when  reared  on 
leaves  dusted  with pollen from Bt. corn than larvae  reared  on 
leaves dusted with untransformed corn pollen.

The  studies conducted by the Cornell entomologists opened  up  a 
veritable Pandora's box of questions. In Britain, the debate over 
whether GM crops should be grown commercially before the end of a 
four-year  period  of research into their  environmental  effects 
took  a violent turn as Greenpeace activists descended  on  trial 
fields  and  ripped  up  the  maize  planted  there.  With  media 
spotlights  focused burningly on the issue, the war on  GM  crops 
remained   no   longer   confined  to   wildlife   advisers   and 
environmental groups but spilled over into the public arena.

The media's inflammatory rhetoric as also the industry's vigilant 
interest  in  GM crops has raised in the public's  mind  inchoate 
images  of  Frankenstein  monstrosities  in  their  daily   food. 
Environmentalists  and  scientific advisers  of  Greenpeace,  who 
regard  genetic  engineering  as naturally  inimical  to  organic 
farming,  have also helped to stoke the fires of  protest.  Their 
argument  that industry's disproportionate influence on  research 
compromises    scientific   independence   indirectly    condemns 
biotechnology  for  being not just big news but big  business  as 
well.  The  profit motive is an innuendo that can recoil  on  the 
environmentalists  also. Biotechnologists consider that  lobbying 
for  the Soil Association is the real purpose behind many of  the 
objections to genetic engineering. The Soil Association, we  must 
remember,  permits  the  use of approved  pesticides  in  organic 
farming. But a more persuasive argument by opponents of GM  crops 
is  that they can have a negative impact on  environment  through 
"genetic pollution." But are such opinions well-founded?

The  fear  that contamination of other crops and  plants  through 
cross-pollination from GM crops is "inevitable and irreversible," 
to  quote Helen Wallace, scientist with Greenpeace, cuts  no  ice 
with biotechnologists. John Beringer, a former government adviser 
in genetically modified releases, likens the targeting of genetic 
engineering by Greenpeace to medieval witch hunting. Granted that 
GM  crops  are risky, "new varieties of  conventional  crops  are 
riskier,"  Beringer argues, because "conventional breeders  cross 
crops  with distant relatives to produce new  hybrids  containing 
thousands of new genes" and "we know almost nothing about  them." 
Why then should the very few genes that are introduced in genetic 
modification cause irreversible damage? 

Seen  in  this light the reaction against Bt. Corn,  now  at  the 
heart of the controversy, appears to be hysterical. According  to 
Novartis,   the  only  difference  between  Bt.  Corn   and   its 
counterpart lies in the production of two supplementary proteins, 
both of which have always existed in bacteria and are ingested by 
humans  and animals every time they eat raw vegetables.  To  stop 
current  genetic modification projects on the grounds  that  they 
are  "risky"  would  only  serve the cause  of  even  more  risky 
traditional crop breeding programmes.

The  aim  of  breeding is to make  crops  disease  resistant  and 
healthier.  Towards this end, genetic engineering offers  several 
advantages  over traditional hybridisation techniques. First,  it 
makes crop protection agents superfluous as the plant is equipped 
to  protect  itself  against pests. The strain on  the  soil  and 
groundwater is thus reduced, and farmers achieve bigger yields on 
the same growing area. Also the reduction in chemicals and  broad 
spectrum pesticides reduces the potential to harm non-target  and 
beneficial  species. In contrast the use of agrochemicals,  which 
are  not  entirely eschewed even by organic  farmers,  makes  the 
produce  itself  a health risk. Our current experience  of  foods 
grown  along conventional lines of intensive farming  would  bear 
this  point out. The vegetables and fruits in our  markets  these 
days  are  so laced with pesticides as to make  them  practically 
inedible.  And the health hazards in the long run  are  extremely 
grave.

We cannot blind ourselves to the fact that 50 years of pesticides 
and  chemical  fertilizers in agriculture while  increasing  crop 
yields has also made farming look like "a 19th century smokestack 
industry", as Jim Orson, director of the Morley Research  Station 
in  Norfolk, ruefully admits. Such methods did help to heap  food 
on  our plates. But as soil and water are stretched to  make  the 
planet  feed  more  and more people,  the  Green  revolution,  so 
effective  in the short term may end up diminishing  the  earth's 
carrying capacity in the long run.

The  search for increasing crop yields or even creating new  food 
types  is dictated by necessity, by the mind-boggling  statistics 
of demographic growth. In 1950, world population was 2.5 billion; 
today  it is around six billion; by 2050 it could be 12  billion. 
"Ten  billion people cannot be nourished even temporarily  unless 
far   greater  resources  are  directed  to  developing  a   more 
productive,  environmentally  sound  agriculture",  worries  Paul 
Ehrlich  of  Stanford University, California. The  scientist  who 
gave currency to the term "population bomb" warns that the  Green 
revolution has already been used up.

This  is  the scenario in which the advantages  of  biotechnology 
must  be dispassionately considered. Intensive  farming  pollutes 
water and depletes non-renewable resources such as soil;  organic 
farming  cannot  boost crop yields to the levels needed  to  feed 
earth's  burgeoning population. Agricultural research,  including 
research  through genetic engineering, is more than  ever  needed 
today  to  stave off famine in the coming decades.  To  ban  gene  
technology  would  be like throwing the baby out  with  the  bath 
water. As Nobel laureate Dr. Richard R. Ernst warned, "One cannot 
deprive  future  generations of a tool for their  survival"  (The 
Hindu, September 23, 1999). The popular resistance to science and 
technology  should not be allowed to harden into a  rejection  of 
its real future benefits.

Unfortunately,   the  public's  attitude  seems  to  be   already 
hardening.  A  sad outcome of the furore about GM  crops  is  the 
recent  shutting  down of a British medical research  firm,  Axis 
Genetic of Cambridge. The company's research was mostly in plant-
based vaccines for hepatitis B, cholera and two other  diarrhoeal 
diseases.  Since no cold storage is needed for the vaccines,  and 
no  needles  either,  the research  is  of  tremendous  potential 
benefit,  especially for poor countries. The experience  of  Axis 
Genetic  is a classic example of how adverse publicity  can  work 
havoc   with  some  of  the  best  beneficial   applications   of 
biotechnology.

What, one might ask, has all this controversy to do with India? A 
lot - considering that it is already present in incipient form in 
this  country especially with new liberalisation policies  having 
opened  the door to multinational players. In our  country  where 
there  is tremendous pressure of population on land,  a  pressure 
that   is   predicted  only  to  increase,  the   sustenance   of 
agricultural growth is crucial to our survival. We can ill-afford 
any   technology  that  might  make  the  country's   agriculture 
dependent  on outside control. The scientific community  must  be 
extremely  vigilant to prevent this from happening.  Clearly  the 
onus  is  on scientists to ensure without any bias  or  prejudice 
that   the  positive  advantages  relative  to  the   risks   are 
scrupulously  weighed  in  order  to  ensure  through  the  right 
decisions  that the benefits of biotechnology are fully  utilised 
even while avoiding the pitfalls.

The  future  of  biotechnology  is  in  the  hands  of  both  the 
scientific  community  and the common folk. The  public  is  less 
likely to be hostile to GM crops if these are seen to benefit the 
consumer  as  well as the farmer. The fear of  biotechnology  can 
also  be allayed if scientists could engage in sensible  dialogue 
with the public and show that the processes and products of  gene 
technology  have  been  properly screened to  take  into  account 
environmental safety as well as consumer benefit. 

On their part, the public would have to be more discriminating in 
scientific  matters  relating to food and health than  they  have 
hitherto  shown  themselves capable. As the storm over  GM  crops 
blows  towards  developing  countries, of one  thing  we  may  be 
certain:  In future, the common man will be  increasingly  called 
upon  to take informed decisions to influence  government  action 
for  policy  directions  in  his  own  best  interests.   Science 
education to enhance the scientific knowledge of ordinary  people 
has therefore assumed an unprecedented importance today. 
