Enemies within 

The many partners of the Bharatiya Janata Party still profess undying love for the master of the National Democratic Alliance , Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee , but at the same time they have begun fighting for turf and are sending strong signals that they can not be taken for granted , and certainly that they may be junior partners of the NDA at the Centre , but must be given the major share of power at the State level .
In Orissa , Mr. Naveen Patnaik 's Biju Janata Dal began the seat- sharing talks with the BJP by offering to leave a few crumbs for it - just 25 seats in an Assembly of 147 .
` ` Electoral adjustments' ' ( as opposed to alliances ) were discussed with the BSP for Haryana , but came to nothing ; after having severed links with Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav in Bihar , the Congress ( I ) has few options ; similarly in Orissa , there are no non-NDA parties with a significant presence with whom the Congress ( I ) can tie up ; and in Manipur , it has become a member of the six-party Secular Democratic Front but even so ` ` friendly contests' ' are expected in all but 15 of the 60 seats .
Three Chief Ministers have been changed in the span of one year ; the State Government 's handling of the post-cyclone situation was seen as unsatisfactory and in-fighting within the party heightened that impression ; there is serious internal bickering among faction leaders ; and of course , the anti-incumbency factor .
Congress ( I ) leaders hope to capitalise on the anti- incumbency factor against the Chief Minister , Mr. Om Prakash Chautala , and exploit the disappointment of the powerful Jat community which is angry over issues such as the hike in diesel prices and Mr. Chautala 's failure to fulfil his promises on electricity and water supply .
Beyond Jharkhand - in north and central Bihar - the Congress ( I ) is aiming for a consolidation of Muslim votes and also hoping that upper castes such as Bhumihars , Rajputs and Brahmins will turn to the party because the BJP is seen as promoting others .
