
Not projecting anyone as CM in polls, says Cong.


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW   DELHI,  JAN  12.  The  Congress  will  not  project   chief 
ministerial  candidates in any of the four States where  Assembly 
elections  are  to be held next month. The party  spokesman,  Mr. 
Ajit  Jogi,  refuted  the statement of the  party's  Orissa  unit 
spokesman  that Mr. J.B. Patnaik, former Chief Minister  and  now 
the  OPCC president, would be projected as the chief  ministerial 
candidate.

Mrs.  Sonia Gandhi, will undertake a two-day tour of Orissa  from 
tomorrow  to  oversee the relief and  rehabilitation  work  being 
undertaken  by  the State Government. It was clarified  that  the 
Election  Commission  had  said that relief works  by  the  State 
Government  would  not  be affected by the  notification  of  the 
Assembly  elections in Orissa and that they could  continue  till 
four days before the polling day. A Congress(I) delegation led by 
Mr. Oscar Fernandes called on the EC on Tuesday to clarify this.

Mr. Jogi said that Mrs. Gandhi's visit was not connected with the 
Assembly  elections.  The Orissa Chief  Minister,  Mr.  Hemananda 
Biswal,  met  Mrs. Gandhi today. She will be accompanied  by  Mr. 
Balram  Jakhar,  Mr.  Anil Shastri and Major  Dalbir  singh.  Mr. 
Ghulam Nabi Azad, currently in Tamil Nadu, will join the group in 
Orissa.

The  Congress(I)  criticised  the statement  of  the  Union  Home 
Minister,  Mr.  L.K. Advani, that the handling of  the  hijacking 
crisis  had  damaged  the image of the BJP and not  that  of  the 
country.  ``This is a BJP-led Government; therefore, it is  wrong 
to  say that the image of the Government and the country has  not 
been damaged,'' Mr. Jogi said.

The  party  also reacted belatedly and weakly to the  RSS  chief, 
Prof. Rajendra Singh's comment that the handling of the hijacking 
episode  was a reflection of Hindu cowardice.  ``The  Congress(I) 
takes  strong objection to this statement. All followers  of  the 
Hindu  religion  must  not be termed  cowards.  The  threat  from 
terrorism to our nation is being faced by the entire country, not 
only Hindus,'' Mr. Jogi said. He saw in the statement an  attempt 
by the Sangh combine to create a communal divide.

Asked about the party's stand on whether the 17th Karmapa  should 
be  granted political asylum, Mr. Jogi refused to comment on  the 
ground  that  the Congress(I) was not in possession  of  all  the 
facts.
