
`No dumping ground for second hand cars'


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  12. The Industry and  Commerce  Minister,  Mr. 
Murasoli  Maran, today allayed the industry's concerns  regarding 
large  scale dumping of imported cars. He said, ``the  Government 
will  consider  all  aspects  of  safety,  pollution  norms   and 
valuation.  Under  no  circumstances, shall we  permit  India  to 
become a second hand dumping ground for junks''.

Inaugurating  the  fifth  Auto  Expo here,  Mr.  Maran  felt  the 
apprehensions  expressed by top CII leaders about the  future  of 
the  automobile industry were premature because there was  enough 
time available to take a considered view in the matter. ``One can 
only  say  that  this nascent industry, or for  that  matter  any 
nascent industry, which has achieved so much in such a short span 
of time, cannot be left in the lurch so easily.''

Significantly,   while   assuring  the  industry   that   blanket 
permission to import any type of second hand cars is unlikely  to 
be allowed, Mr. Maran stopped well short of promising a  complete 
full  stop  to import of second hand cars. The  Confederation  of 
Indian  Industry  (CII)  and its free  market  cheerleaders  have 
consistently  opposed any attempt to push a policy which  permits 
such imports. On the other hand, the Government argues that  such 
a  step  is inevitable owing to WTO commitment.  Mr.  Maran  also 
stuck to this line and while assuring that indiscriminate imports 
will  not  be permitted, he withheld  any  categorical  assurance 
against stopping imports completely.

Earlier, the CII president, Mr. Rahul Bajaj, listed a four- point 
wishlist  for  the  Government.  One,  the  industry  wanted  the 
Government  to  support  it  just as  was  the  case  with  other 
governments.   ``We  don't  want  protection,''   he   clarified, 
``because the days of protection are over''. Second, as economies 
of scale become important, merger and amalgamations were becoming 
crucial. The Government must speed up work on legislation.

Mr.  Bajaj also called upon the Government to  quickly  introduce 
the competition policy and remove all limits imposed on  transfer 
of  technology.  Noting  that  a  committee  headed  by  the  Law 
Minister,  Mr. Ram Jethmalani, was preparing a draft  competition 
policy, the CII chief launched a broadside against some  chambers 
of  commerce  opposing the proposed policy. ``It  is  crucial  to 
ensure fair play, competition and consumer protection. There  are 
some  who do not understand the importance of competition  policy 
and are, therefore, opposing it.''
