
Inputs from India critical: WTO chief


By Sushma Ramachandran

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 12. India's ``extremely strong views''  opposing 
linkage  of  trade to the social clause will be conveyed  to  the 
developed  countries  such as the U.S. and  the  European  Union, 
according to the Director General of the World Trade Organisation 
Mr.Mike Moore.

He  said the inputs from India would be critical in view  of  its 
importance in the organisation. The Indian Ambassador was present 
at  all the meetings prior to and during the Seattle meeting,  he 
pointed  out.  Besides,  he  said, there  was  a  core  group  of 
ministers  that  will  be  critical to  success  and  the  Indian 
Commerce Minister was one of them.

In  his  first  visit  to  a  member-country  after  the  Seattle 
conference, he held a series of talks with the Commerce Minister, 
Mr.Murasoli Maran on India's stance on the proposed new round  of 
trade  negotiations  as well as a host of other  critical  issues 
such as non-trade barriers and anti-dumping measures. He also met 
the  Union Finance Minister, Mr. Yashwant Sinha, in  a  three-day 
visit, marked by demonstrations held by both trade unions and the 
Swadeshi Jagran Manch.

In an interview, Mr Moore said the bureaucratic machinery was now 
moving prior to discussing the mandated agriculture and  services 
negotiations this year. Both the agriculture and services grounds 
were  to begin in parallel. ``You can expect to  see  discussions 
about  structure of negotiations in the next month or  two,''  he 
said.

As for the new round of trade negotiations, he could not say when 
this  would  begin. ``For me, it should have been  yesterday,  it 
should   have  been  at  Seattle.  It  depends  on  the   member-
governments.''

On  India's  stand on social issues, he said there  had  been  no 
change  in  its  ``extremely strong  views''  since  the  Seattle 
meeting. 

Mr  Moore said that he would be conveying India's message to  the 
U.S.  and the European Community which he planned to visit  soon. 
There  had  been  no  change in the  position  of  the  developed 
countries  who needed a cooling-off period after  Seattle.  ``And 
really  I cannot negotiate through the media. But I can tell  you 
honestly  there  is  no  lessening  of  the  Indian  position  as 
expressed  in Seattle on the social clause. It is deeply  felt,'' 
he said.
