
Cabinet nod for fresh probe into anti-Sikh riots


By P.K. Bhardwaj

NEW DELHI, JAN. 12. A fresh judicial probe into the November 1984 
anti-Sikh  riots  by a retired Supreme Court judge is  among  the 
several  decisions  taken  by the Union Cabinet  which  met  here 
today. 

The  other  important proposals cleared by  the  Cabinet  include 
another  relief package for the super cyclone victims of  Orissa, 
on  technology mission for improving the quantity and quality  of 
cotton  produced in the country, extending  satellite  networking 
facilities to Indian companies and sharing of the INSAT time with 
non-Government  users  and  leasing out five  major  airports  in 
preference to their corporatisation and an Ordinance to amend the 
Debt   Recovery   Tribunal   Act.  The   Cabinet   rejected   the 
controversial recommendations by the Bakshi Committee,  proposing 
higher  salary  benefits  for  the  faculties  of  the  All-India 
Institute  of Medical Sciences and the  Post-Graduate  Institute, 
Chandigarh. 

The one-man Judicial Commission to be set up to inquire into  the 
anti-Sikh  riots in Delhi and other areas of the country  in  the 
wake  of the assassination of the former Prime  Minister,  Indira 
Gandhi, on October 31, 1984 will be headed by a retired judge  of 
the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India.

The terms of reference for the inquiry to be completed within six 
months, requires the Commission to go into the causes and  course 
of  criminal violence and riots targeting Sikhs.  The  Commission 
will  function  from the capital and look into  the  sequence  of 
events leading to all facts relating to violence and riots. 

Apart  from  examining the complaints and allegations  either  by 
individuals  or  the  Government, the Commission  will  find  out 
whether  the heinous crimes could have been averted  and  whether 
there  were  any  lapses or dereliction of duty on  the  part  of 
police  and  others. It will go into adequacy  of  administrative 
measures  taken  to prevent the violence and  recommend  measures 
that  would meet the end of justice. It was free to consider  any 
other issue relevant to the probe. 

Denying that the decision was politically motivated and  directed 
against  the Congress(I), the Union Parliamentary  Minister,  Mr. 
Pramod Mahajan, who briefed the media after the Cabinet  meeting, 
reeled  off facts and figures to justify the decision. The  riots 
were probed by the Ranganath Mishra Commission and two committees 
and 147 police officers were blamed for dereliction of duty. 

Fortytwo out of them had either died or retired. Of the rest,  77 
were exonerated, one warned and 14 punished. Proceedings  against 
13 others were in progress and only 10 were found guilty.  

Similarly,  707 criminal cases were registered. Out of them,  322 
cases  were sent as untraced and cancelled. As many as 320  cases 
had  ended  in acquittal. While 25 cases were  pending  in  trial 
courts, only 30 cases, which did not constitute even 10 per  cent 
of the total, resulted in conviction. 

In  these circumstances, the Government thought of re-  examining 
everything  and  decided to constitute a fresh probe.  A  similar 
judicial  probe  had been ordered by the  Congress(I)  Government 
earlier.

The  first hint at such a probe came during the last  session  of 
Parliament.  The  Union  Home Minister, Mr.  L.  K.  Advani,  had 
offered  a fresh probe into the riots following a demand  by  the 
Akalis.  After Mr. Advani had said that the Congress(I) had  some 
reservations over the issue, the party reacted by saying that  it 
would welcome such a probe. 

The new package for Orissa envisages implementation of the  Food-
for-Work  Programme under the Employment Assurance Scheme in  all 
the 14 affected districts. Two kg of rice will be supplied  under 
the programme to persons belonging to the Below Poverty Line(BPL) 
families and BPL prices. The Food Corporation would make the rice 
available  to  the Orissa Government, which would  implement  the 
programme at a cost of Rs. 275 crores.

About 2.5 lakh houses would be constructed under the Indira  Awas 
Yojna and 50,000 more houses under the credit and subsidy housing 
scheme. 
