
Tibetans waiting for India's move


By Sujay Mehdudia

DHARAMSALA, (H.P.), JAN. 12. With the issue of granting political 
asylum  to the 17th Karmapa threatening to snowball into a  major 
controversy,  the  Tibetan government-in-exile  is  now  mounting 
pressure  on the Indian Government to recognise the  presence  of 
the 17th Karampa and grant him asylum. 

 The assistance of the U.S. has also, reportedly been sought  for 
the  purpose.  Though it may be a coincidence, the visit  of  the 
U.S.  Assistance Secretary of State for Population and  Migration 
Affairs,  Ms.  Julie  Taft, who also happens to  be  the  Special 
Secretary  for Tibet, is also being watched with great  interest. 
Ms.  Taft,  who  is here to overlook  the  scheme  initiated  for 
Tibetan  refugees,  reportedly  held  consultations  with  senior 
Tibetan  officials last evening over dinner. The  possibility  of 
her meeting Ogyan Trinley Dorjee is also not ruled out. 

On  the  other  hand, the Tibetan  government-in-exile  is  still 
assessing  the situation. It seems the Kashag  (Tibetan  Cabinet) 
which  met  here  last evening, is divided  on  how  to  formally 
request  the Indian Government for asylum. A section  of  Tibetan 
officials  are also watching the whole situation,  including  the 
arrival of the Karampa, with suspicion. 

 However,  senior Tibetan officials discounted any such  division 
in the ranks and said the government-in-exile had been rattled by 
the sudden arrival of the 17th Karmapa. Some officials have  also 
reportedly  got in touch with their people in Lhasa to gauge  the 
mood  there  and  ascertain the circumstances which  led  to  the 
flight  of  the Karampa to India. Struggling to come round  to  a 
firm stand on the issue, the Tibetans, it seems, are now  waiting 
for the Indian Government to make the first move before  anything 
is taken up formally at the highest level. 

Some  senior  officials  of the  Intelligence  Bureau  have  also 
arrived  in  Mcleodganj  and have  held  consultations  with  the 
Tibetan officials over the issue. A Joint Secretary rank official 
of the Ministry of External Affairs also met senior officials  of 
the  Tibetan Cabinet and discussed the issue of Karampa  and  his 
security. 

 State officials here are intrigued why he is not being put up in 
the  spiritual  leader Dalai Lama's palace  in  McLoedganj  which 
enjoys the highest protection as the 14-year-old Karmapa faces  a 
security  threat. When the issue was raised by  police  officials 
with the Tibetan Cabinet members, they are learnt to have replied 
that  protocol  does  not allow this. However,  under  the  given 
circumstances,  should things like protocol get  precedence  over 
the security of the ``Living Buddha?'', a senior official asked. 

 The  State authorities are still awaiting word from the  Central 
Government  on how to deal with the extraordinary  situation.  In 
normal  circumstances,  any Tibetan migrant  coming  to  Himachal 
Pradesh without valid documents is treated as ``illegal  person'' 
and is deported back to Nepal after registration of a police case 
against  him.  Officials  said on an average,  around  15  to  20 
Tibetan  refugees  walk into Dharamshala everyday  without  valid 
documents.  Many  have been deported but somehow  manage  to  get 
back.  But  in  the  case  of  the  Karmapa  and  his  six  other 
associates, the ball is in the court of the Central Government. 

 The  Tibetan  officials feel that international opinion  in  the 
coming days would force the Indian Government to take a  decision 
on  the  issue notwithstanding the threat from  China  which  has 
asked  India  not  to  grant political  asylum  to  the  Karmapa. 
Officials here are also intrigued by the timing of the arrival of 
the  17th Karmapa. His arrival into the country comes at  a  time 
when  Indo-China relations were on the upswing. It is  felt  that 
any wrong move could deal a great setback to these relations. 

 Meanwhile, it is learnt that preparations are already being made 
at  the Shera Billing of Monastery of Tai Sutu Rampoche  in  Beed 
near Baijnath about 45 km from here for the formal arrival of the 
17th Karmapa. The monastery is being decked up. Reports indicated 
that  security agencies have also reached the venue  and  carried 
out a survey of the area. 

It  is learnt that the Karmapa might not be kept at Sidhbari  for 
long  in  view  of the mounting security concerns  and  could  be 
shifted  within a few days to the Beed Monastry. This could  also 
be  a  ploy  to keep him away from public  glare.  Tibetans  have 
already  started  flocking  to the Shera  Biling  Monastery  with 
offerings  for  the 17th Karmapa. But it is  unlikely  that  they 
would  be allowed access to the `Living Buddha' when  he  reaches 
there. 
