
New EC appointed


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW   DELHI,  JAN.  12.  Mr.  T.S.  Krishna  Murthy,   Secretary, 
Department  of Company Affairs, is the new Election  Commissioner 
in  place of Mr. G.V.G.Krishnamurty who retired on  September  30 
last.

Mr.  Krishna Murthy is a 1963 batch Indian Revenue Service  (IRS) 
officer and will have a tenure of more than five years in the EC. 

* * *

A man of varied experience

NEW DELHI, JAN. 12. The Vajpayee government took more than  three 
months  to find a successor for Mr. Krishnamurthy as it was  keen 
on  filling  up  the  vacancy  with  a  candidate  with  a  legal 
background  and  preferably from any of the  southern  states  to 
ensure `balanced representation' in the Commission.

The Presidential order appointing Mr. Murthy as the third  member 
of  the  commission was issued today and  the  appointment  takes 
effect from the date he assumes his office. Mr. Krishnamurthy  is 
expected to assume his new assignment by the end of this month.

Under  the Constitution, Election Commissioners hold  office  for 
six years or upto the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.  Mr. 
Krishna Murthy who was to retire in May on attainment of 65 years 
will  retire in 2005 and has a good chance of becoming the  Chief 
Election Commissioner in the course of his tenure.

Mr.  Murthy  has varied experience of having  served  in  various 
capacities  including Chief Commissioner of Income Tax at  Mumbai 
and   Chennai,  Director  General  of  Income   Tax,   Additional 
Secretary,   Expenditure   Department  at  the  Centre   and   an 
international assignment as Resident Tax Adviser at Ethiopia.

Holder of a masters degree in fiscal studies from the  University 
of  Bath in the United Kingdom, he had done bachelor of law  with 
the University of Madras and bachelor of arts from University  of 
Mysore. 

The Chief Election Commissioner, Dr. M.S. Gill, said he was happy 
over   the  appointment  of  Mr.  Murthy  as  the  new   Election 
Commissioner.  ``I welcome him and look forward to  working  with 
him'', he said.

Any further delay in appointment of a third Election Commissioner 
could  have led to complications as the Commission has  announced 
assembly  elections in four states next month. The Supreme  Court 
has not only upheld the validity of the multi- member  Commission  
with equal power among the CEC and the ECs but held that all  the 
decisions  in the Commission will be majority decisions.  In  the 
absence  of  a  third member in the  Commission,  any  difference 
between the CEC and the EC could lead to a piquant situation.
