
CPI(M) meeting shifted to Calcutta


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  12.  A  three-day  CPI(M)  politburo  meeting, 
scheduled to have been held here from Friday, has been shifted to 
Calcutta,  touching off speculation that this may have  something 
to  do  with  the party's difficulties  with  its  ``dissenting'' 
comrades.

The  CPI(M) denied this saying that the sole reason for  changing 
the  venue  was the indifferent health of the West  Bengal  Chief 
Minister, Mr. Jyoti Basu, who may have found it difficult to  put 
up  with Delhi's cold. Delhi was in the grip of a cold wave  when 
the decision was taken, party sources explained.

They  declined to comment if the issues raised by  Mr.  Saifuddin 
Chaudhury  and  some  others relating to  the  need  for  greater 
openness within the party would be discussed but emphasised  that 
the  only  subject  on the agenda was a review  of  the  CPI(M)'s 
programme  which  had  not  been revised  since  1964.  A  senior 
politburo  member,  Mr.  Prakash  Karat,  said  the  question  of 
updating the programme had been hanging fire for a long time, and 
the  party was keen on getting down to it without further  delay. 
The  programme would be updated in the light of some of the  more 
significant  political developments which had occurred in  recent 
years,  particularly in the ``socialist'' world. But  no  radical 
changes were expected and certainly there would be no dilution of 
the party's basic ideological positions.

This  would be the first exhaustive discussion on the  issue  and 
the  ideas  thrown  up at the meeting would form  the  basis  for 
preparing a draft. Party sources said they doubted if there would 
be enough time to take up other issues.

Observers,  however, were tempted to read more in the  change  of 
venue.  They  pointed  out that the idea seemed  to  be  use  the 
politburo  meeting  to project a ``united'' image of  the  party; 
this  was  easier  to do in Calcutta  where  the  leadership  had 
greater manoeuvrability than in Delhi.

Mr.  Saifuddin Chaudhury, who has been given a show-cause  notice 
for  alleged breach of party discipline, is expected to give  his 
reply  before the politburo meeting ends. But a decision  on  his 
future is unlikely to be taken at the meeting.
