
No change in funds allocation formula for poverty alleviation


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 12. A sub-committee of the National  Development 
Council  (NDC) today decided not to tamper with the  formula  for 
allocation  of funds under the Centrally-sponsored rural  poverty 
alleviation programmes. 

The sub-committee, comprising the Deputy Chairman of the Planning 
Commission,   Mr.  K.C.  Pant,  the  Union  Minister  for   Rural 
Development, Mr. Sunderlal Patwa, the Tamil Nadu Chief  Minister, 
Mr.  M.  Karunanidhi,  the Rajasthan Chief  Minister,  Mr.  Ashok 
Ghelot,  the Orissa Chief Minister, Mr. Hemandra Biswal, and  the 
Uttar  Pradesh  Chief  Minister, Mr. Ram Prakash  Gupta  (he  was 
represented  by  the State Planning Minister,  Mr.  Suresh  Kumar 
Khanna),  felt  that even as some States were  unhappy  with  the 
methodology for estimating the incidence of poverty, it would  be 
prudent  to  continue with the existing formula since  funds  had 
been  allocated  on this basis for the first three years  of  the 
Ninth Plan period. As only two years were left for the Ninth Plan 
to  end, it was felt that a modification in the formula could  be 
implemented from the Tenth Plan onwards.

However,  the  States present at today's meeting  felt  that  the 
Planning  Commission  should also incorporate the  views  of  the 
States  while  finalising  allocations  for  poverty  alleviation 
programmes during the Tenth Plan. Mr. Karunanidhi said Tamil Nadu 
was  being penalised for effectively controlling  population  and 
for  providing  improved  rural linkages  because  of  which  the 
State's  share  in poverty alleviation funds had  come  down.  He 
wanted  that for the Tenth Plan period, 20 per cent of the  funds 
be  allocated on the basis of a State's performance in the  field 
of  welfare, education, health and nutrition and increased  rural 
connectivity. 

Rajasthan  wanted  a  special package  for  States  with  special 
problems  such  as widespread drought and  intensive  pockets  of 
poverty while Uttar Pradesh wanted special incentives for  States 
which undertook economic reforms. The need for setting up a  sub-
committee  of the NDC arose because the Planning  Commission  had 
changed  the formula for estimating the incidence of  poverty  at 
the level of States in 1993-94. Till then, estimates were made on 
the  basis  of  the data  on  household  consumption  expenditure 
released  by the National Sample Survey Organisation  (NSSO)  and 
the  recommendations of the methodology of estimation made  by  a 
``task  force''  on projections of minimum  needs  and  effective 
consumption demand. 

However,  in 1989, an ``expert group'' was constituted under  the 
eminent economist, D.T. Lakdawala, to consider issues relating to 
estimation  of  poverty. This group had presented its  report  on 
estimates of poverty for 1993-94 and the Planning Commission  had  
accepted  them  in  1997.  But  a  comparison  with  the  earlier 
estimates and those of the ``expert group'' revealed that as many 
as  eight  States  were  adversely affected  in  their  share  of 
allocations under the poverty alleviation programmes.

In  view of complaints from the States, an internal  exercise  in 
the  Planning  Commission  worked out an  adjustment  formula  to 
contain the losses of the affected States. It was decided that if 
the  States  were  losing more than 15 per  cent  under  the  new 
formula  as compared to what they were getting under the  earlier 
one, the loss would be covered to the extent of 15 per cent only. 
For States where the loss was less than 15 per cent, the ``expert 
group'' estimates were to be retained.

However,  this adjusted formula was also not acceptable  to  some 
States who felt that the adjustment worked out was arbitrary  and 
hence  should  not be used for allocation of  funds  under  rural 
poverty  alleviation  programmes in the Ninth Plan.  Some  States 
advocated maintenance of status quo in the allocation of funds as 
per  the  earlier formula while some others wanted  the  ``expert 
group''  formula  to be implemented. In view  of  such  differing 
views,  the matter was placed before the NDC which set up a  sub-
committee to go into the matter.
