
AP, Karnataka squabble over Krishna water


By S. K. Ramoo

BANGALORE, JAN. 12. The utilisation of 330 tmc ft. of the Krishna 
water under Scheme B of the Bachawat Tribunal Award has become  a 
fresh bone of contention between Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.

The website of the Andhra Pradesh Government, reportedly claiming 
that  it had plans to spend Rs. 33,000 crores for the  completion 
of on-going projects in the Krishna basin for the utilisation  of 
surplus  water, was brought to public attention by  the  Minister 
for Major and Medium Irrigation, Mr. H. K. Patil.

Earlier,  objecting to the move by Karnataka to raise the  height 
of  the  Alamatti Dam to Full Reservoir Level  of  (FRL)  524.256 
metres,  Andhra  Pradesh  had dragged the State  to  the  Supreme 
Court.  The  court is yet to deliver its final  judgment  on  the 
issue.

Karnataka  has  made  a fresh allegation  that  the  website  had 
confirmed  that it had launched eight irrigation projects in  the 
Krishna  basin  for utilisation of all surplus water.  The  Chief 
Minister, Mr. S. M. Krishna, on Sunday despatched a letter to the 
Prime  Minister,  Mr.  Atal Behari Vajpayee,  drawing  the  Union 
Government's  attention  to the website. He urged the  Centre  to 
prevent  Andhra Pradesh from going ahead with the  ``unapproved'' 
projects for the utilisation of surplus water. He appealed to the 
Prime  Minister  to constitute an inter-state authority  for  the 
execution  of  Scheme B for utilisation of  surplus  water  among 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra.

The tribunal, under Scheme B, allotted 2,390 tmc ft. on the basis 
of  50 per cent of dependable flow. Thus, 330 tmc ft was  treated 
as  surplus  water.  The  share upto 2,060 tmc  ft  was  550  for 
Maharashtra, 700 tmc ft. for Karnataka and 800 tmc ft. for Andhra 
Pradesh. In excess of 2,060 tmc ft, the share of Maharashtra  was 
35  per cent (24.5 tmc ft.), Karnataka 50 per cent (35  tmc  ft.) 
and  Andhra Pradesh 15 per cent (15 tmc ft.). In excess of  2,130 
tmc  ft., the share of Maharashtra was 25 per cent, Karnataka  50 
per cent and Andhra Pradesh 25 per cent.

Scheme  A was part of the gazetted order of the Centre dated  May 
31,  1976. However, Scheme B, although drawn up by the  Tribunal, 
was  not made part of the final award as Andhra Pradesh  objected 
to the proposed Krishna Valley Authority.

Karnataka sought an injunction from the Supreme Court to restrain 
Andhra  Pradesh  from continuing the execution of projects  of  a 
permanent  nature,  involving  the  use  of  surplus  water.  Its 
contention was that the tribunal had permitted the utilisation of 
surplus  water by Andhra Pradesh only by way of temporary  right, 
till  the implementation of Scheme B. The State had alleged  that  
Andhra Pradesh was trying to create a fait accompli to defeat the 
sharing of surplus water.

Karnataka is planning for the utilisation of 173 tmc ft. of water 
under Scheme A - 119 tmcft. under the UKP Stage I and 54 tmc  ft. 
under  the UKP Stage II. The Planning Commission cleared the  UKP 
Stage  I  way  back on April 22, 1978. But the UKP  Stage  II  is 
awaiting clearance since February 1982. Karnataka had  complained 
that the inordinate delay in sanctioning the UKP Stage II had led 
to  unwarranted litigation and frustrated its attempt to  utilise 
its share of water within the stipulated time-frame.

Interestingly,  the  Union  Government, in  a  written  statement 
before  the Supreme Court in 1997, observed that  Andhra  Pradesh 
had  failed to establish that following the construction  of  the 
Alamatti Dam, Karnataka would be utilising more than its share of 
water. It pointed out that water distribution was on the basis of 
gross  allocation  and not project-specific.  But  strangely  the 
Union Government, in its counter-affidavit filed before the  apex 
court  on November 24, 1999, retracted from its earlier stand  by 
stating  that  the  storage  in  the  Alamatti  and   Narayanapur 
reservoirs  would be only the quantity approved by  the  Planning 
Commission.  The Karnataka Government had drawn the attention  of 
the  Union Government that such a rider was not imposed by it  on 
Andhra Pradesh's unapproved projects.

Maharashtra  had originally supported the height of the  Alamatti 
dam  at 524.256 metres on July 11, 1997. But one year  later,  it 
changed tack on the ground that increasing the height of the  dam 
would result in submersion of its territory. To allay its  fears, 
the  Karnataka  Government  got a study done by  experts  of  the 
Indian  Institute  of  Science, Bangalore, who  opined  that  any 
submersion  following  the construction of the Alamatti  Dam  and 
Hippargi  barrage would be confined only to  Karnataka  territory 
and not to areas in Maharashtra.

Karnataka  in fact had planned the construction of  the  Alamatti 
dam  at a height of FRL 524.256 metres under the UKP way back  in 
1968  for the creation of both irrigation facilities  and  hydro-
electric power generation. When Scheme B was put into  operation, 
the   State  had  to  step  up  its  irrigation  facilities   for 
utilisation  of  its share of surplus water. For  Karnataka,  the 
Alamatti reservoir was the only storage available for utilisation 
of  its  share of surplus water. Since inception,  the  stand  of 
Karnataka was consistent.

Interestingly, the Planning Commission committed in writing  that 
it had no objections to Karnataka building the Alamatti Dam to  a 
height  of 524.256 metres. The Director of Gates Division of  the 
Central  Water  Commission,  in  a letter  dated  July  4,  1996, 
consented  to  the  gates  design at FRL  524.  256  metres.  The 
Hydrology  Directorate of the Central Water  Commission  informed 
the State Government that it had cleared the hydrology aspects of 
UKP Stage II.

According  to Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh's Telugu  Ganga  project, 
which was being executed for utilisation of 29 tmc ft. of  water, 
had  not  received  clearance  from  the  Centre.  Karnataka  had 
objected  to its over- sized canal network. According to  it,  it 
had  the  potential  of  utilising over  300  tmc  ft.  of  water 
annually.

Karnataka is likely to face a severe law and order problem if two 
political leaders of Gulbarga District, Mr. Vaijanath Patil,  and 
Mr.  Hanumantha Rao Desai decide to carry out their  threat  that 
about  50,000 farmers would perform ``kar seva''  for  increasing 
the  height of the Alamatti Dam to FRL in February as part  of  a 
planned agitation.
