
'Press campaign on to weaken CPI(M)'


By Our Special Correspondent

CALCUTTA,  JAN. 12. A concerted campaign appears to be under  way 
to malign as well as weaken the CPI(M), Mr.Anil Biswas, secretary 
of the party's West Bengal unit, said today.

For  the  second time within a month, Mr.Biswas who is  also  the 
CPI(M)  politburo  member, said a section of the  newspapers  had 
been  conducting  a ``systematic'' campaign to  ``disgrace''  the 
party.

The  immediate provocation for Mr. Biswas' statement seems to  be 
the report in a Bengali-language newspaper today on the  strategy 
the  CPI(M)  rebels  had worked out if  the  leadership  takes  a 
drastic step against them.

The  report says the Transport Minister,  Mr.Subhas  Chakraborty, 
the former Rajya Sabha MP, Mr.Saifuddin Chowdhury, and  secretary 
of  the CPI(M)'s North 24-Parganas district, Mr.Samir  Putatunda, 
are preparing to confront the leadership in the coming days.

It  said  the  leadership  was  firm  on  disciplining  at  least 
Mr.Chowdhury  among the rebels, who had made public  the  present 
debate between the leadership and the pro-changers.

``The  moment  the party expels Mr.Chowdhury, a large  number  of 
workers will leave the party,'' the report said.

The  report also pointed out that Mr.Chakraborty on  Sunday  told 
his  mates  that Mr.Somnath Chatterjee,  senior  parliamentarian, 
would be the rebels' leader.

The  report is apparently causing a great deal of  discomfort  to 
the CPI(M) leadership as the party's three-day politburo  meeting 
is slated to be held in the city from January 14. 

As  it is, the leadership has been working overtime for the  past 
several  weeks to assure the workers that things were not so  bad 
as was being made out by the newspapers. ``Certain forces do  not 
want the party to stay together. They are indulging in all  kinds 
of nasty games to create divisions,'' Mr. Biswas said.

It is unlikely that the coming politburo meeting will take up the 
issue of dissidence. The focus is expected to be on updating  the 
party programme instead. 

By  doing so, the leadership thinks, it would be able to  send  a 
message to the rebels that there was actually no conflict between 
them.
