
Protests mark new round of Janmabhoomi


By R.J.Rajendra Prasad.

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  12.  The  11th  round  of  Janmabhoomi,   which 
concluded  yesterday with impressive human chains in major  towns 
in  the  State,  was marked by contentious  student  protests,  a 
bitter criticism of the Opposition role by the Chief Minister, Mr 
N.Chandrababu  Naidu, and an embarrassing point for the  Congress 
(I),  which  would have abolished the programme had  it  come  to 
power,  but which was obliged to defend the participation of  its 
MLAs in the programme.

The  Janmabhoomi programme was introduced in 1997, and  has  been 
hailed by independent observers as a programme of self help  that 
has  given  a  fillip to development  of  infrastructure  in  the 
villages,  by  eliminating  red  tape,  and  by  empowering   the 
villagers  through the gram sabhas. The elimination of  red  tape 
itself  became  the contentious issue. A road worth  Rs  5  lakhs 
could be laid in three months because the gram sabha decided  who 
could  lay  the road, and settle the bill, and the  Congress  (I) 
said  that this was the surest way to benefit Telugu Desam  Party 
workers,  who  could  get  the  contract,  inflate  the  cost  of 
construction, and make neat profits. The other route of following 
check  measurement  and  calling for tenders,  by  the  Executive 
Engineer  with  the  overall  supervision  of  a   Superintending 
Engineer,  would have required atleast two years to complete  the 
road.

This  Janmabhoomi  was  the first to be held  after  the  general 
elections,  with TDP and BJP alliance coming to power,  with  the 
Congress  (I)  failing to make the grade and  the  two  Communist 
Parties  having  a vastly reduced presence in the  Assembly.  The 
Congress (I) and the Communist Parties have come together for the 
first  time,  on  a  joint programme of  action,  to  oppose  the 
Janmabohoomi.  The 13 student and youth organisations  that  came 
together,  could stage protests, but they could not  disrupt  nor 
even reduce the impact of the programme. This is because one lakh 
College  students  participated in  conducting  a  socio-economic 
survey  of  the households, and preparing a ``micro-  plan''  for 
development, which was the highlight of the programme.

The  Junior  Doctors strike, for higher stipends, had  a  greater 
impact  on  Janmabhoomi  because it  disrupted  the  free  health 
checkup  camps that were planned earlier, and it was  the  Junior 
Doctors    who   gheraoed   the   Minister   for   Finance,    Mr 
Y.Ramakrishnudu,  at  the Visakhapatnam General  Hospital.  Also, 
there  was  a strike by students of the  Agricultural  University 
alleging that a student died of heart attack because no ambulance 
was provided to him in time. The Chief Minister intervened in the 
dispute, upholding the students' point, and ordered that the Dean 
of Student Affairs and Warden of Hostels should be replaced,  but 
it  was  the  turn  of the teaching staff  to  protest,  and  the  
teachers resigned from other posts they were holding and  refused 
to attend to duties.

The coming together of the Congress (I), CPI, CPI (M), CPI  (ML), 
and other smaller groups, to oppose not only Janmabhoomi but  the 
other  reforms under implementation, has posed a major  challenge 
to  the  Chief  Minister. Mr. Chandrababu  Naidu  says  that  the 
Opposition wants the Government to fill up all backlog vacancies, 
increase  stipends to junior doctors, provide increased  DA,  but 
levy  no  taxes, and still revive all  sick  public  undertakings 
through infusion of capital and complete all on going  irrigation 
projects. How is this possible?, he asks. 

The APCC President, Dr Y.S.Rajasekhara Reddy, has reiterated  his 
opposition  to  Janmabhoomi,  describing  it  as  a  ``completely 
useless  programme'',  but asserted that the Congress  (I)  never 
gave a call for boycott of the programme. 

He defended the participation of several Congress (I) MLAs in the 
Janmabhoomi,  saying that just because the Congress  (I)  opposed 
hike  in  bus fares, it does not follow Congressmen  would  avoid 
travelling by buses.
