
Sinha reconfirms decision to privatise banks


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 12. The Union Finance  Minister,  Mr.  Yashwant 
Sinha,  today reconfirmed the Government's decision to  privatise 
public  sector banks. Presiding over a review meeting  of  public 
sector  banks  here, he categorically told the top  bankers  that 
they  would  have to look for alternative sources of  finance  to 
meet their re- capitalisation norms as prescribed by the  Reserve 
Bank.  Funds  for this purpose would not be  available  from  the 
Union Budget, the Minister said, indicating that the banks  would 
have to shed equity to raise resources.

However,  at the end of the meeting, the chief executives of  the 
banks  said that in the interest of competition,  efficiency  and 
coverage  of  services to all sections, it would  be  prudent  to 
allow  the public and private sector banks to compete and it  was 
not necessary to fully privatise public sector banks. 

The Minister suggested to the bankers that they quickly liquidate 
non-performing assets (NPAs) and ensure that fresh NPAs were  not 
built  up. Despite the emphasis on restricting NPAs in  the  last 
few years, they had actually increased, he pointed out.

In this context, the Minister said the bankers should  deliberate 
on the creation of asset reconstruction companies and  settlement 
advisory  committees  in banks so that the problem  of  NPAs  was 
sorted  out.  Also,  the question  of  procedures  for  advances, 
appraisal   and   disbursement  of  loans  should   become   more 
transparent and effective.

Referring  to  the industry demand for lower interest  rates,  he 
said  the  fiscal climate had to be created so  that  the  market 
could decide on the level of rates without any intermediation  by 
the  Government  or the RBI. Mr. Sinha expressed concern  at  the 
declining  credit  deposit  ratio  and  unsatisfactory   customer 
service  and urged the bankers to work out mechanisms to  address 
these problems.

Responding  to  the  points raised by  the  Minister,  the  chief 
executives later decided to improve customer service and  provide 
more autonomy and flexibility in operational matters.

The  meeting felt that with public shareholding, there  would  be 
need for the banks putting in place modern practices of corporate 
governance.
