
'No IA flight to Kathmandu without fool-proof security'


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 12. India's efforts in the past to have  airport 
security   tightened   at  the  Kathmandu   airport   ``did   not 
materialise'', the Union Minister for Civil Aviation, Mr.  Sharad 
Yadav,  told  mediapersons  here  today.  He  was  responding  to 
questions  on the recent hijacking of Indian Airlines  Kathmandu-
Delhi flight.

He  said Indian Airlines would not resume its services  to  Nepal 
till   it  was  assured  of  fool-proof  security.  ``We   cannot 
compromise  the security of passengers even if we have to  suffer 
losses.  Negotiations  are already on with Nepal for  this,''  he 
said.

The  Minister was accompanied by his colleague, the  Minister  of 
State, Mr. Chamanlal Gupta, and senior aviation officials.

Security  concerns at the Kathmandu airport were raised with  the 
Nepalese Government in 1987, 1993 and in 1998. However, under the 
bilateral Air Services Agreement between the two countries, Nepal 
had  disallowed  `ladder-point' security checks ``as  with  other 
airlines'',  said  the Chairman-cum-Managing Director  of  Indian 
Airlines, Mr. Anil Baijal, who was also present.

The Minister absolved IA of any security lapses at the  Tribhuvan 
airport  saying  it  was  the  responsibility  of  the   security 
personnel  at  that  airport. It was incorrect to  say  that  the 
hijackers  were upgraded by the IA staff there or that  they  had 
arrived on a PIA flight and boarded the IA aircraft.

However, the Secretary, Civil Aviation, Mr. Ravindra Gupta,  said 
airlines  the  world  over  were supposed to  take  care  of  the 
registered baggage checks, interline baggage security and ladder-
point frisking. On posting sky marshals on passenger flights, Mr. 
Yadav said security was a national issue and he would not divulge 
details except give the assurance that ``passenger security would 
not be compromised''.

A new aviation policy was being finalised and the thrust would be 
on privatisation and expansion. However, foreign (airline) equity 
would  not  be  allowed  in  the  domestic  sector.  Air  India's 
financial  health  was a challenge and IA needed  small  aircraft 
particularly to tourist destinations in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh 
and  Uttar  Pradesh,  but they were not  viable  because  of  the 
domestic cost of aviation fuel.

Mr.  Yadav  said he made a surprise-check of  the  Indira  Gandhi 
International  Airport on Tuesday and suspended  seven  personnel 
who were ``permanent absentees''.
