
'Identities of hijackers can be established'


By Arunkumar Bhatt

MUMBAI,  JAN.  12.  Dr. Anita Joshi, a hostage  of  the  hijacked 
Indian  Airlines flight whose medical skills were a boon  to  the 
passengers,  today confirmed that all hijackers  invariably  kept 
their  masks  on but some alert hostages got a  few  glimpses  of 
parts  of their faces when the ``tormentors'' were either  eating 
or  drinking.  These glimpses by  different  passengers  together 
could  give enough clues to build a picture of the hijackers  and 
could be matched with the photographs released by the Union  Home 
Minister, Mr. L.K. Advani.

She told The Hindu today that she was surprised that a section of 
Indian language press as well as the Washington Post (carrying an 
AP  report)  had made out that she had seen  and  recognised  the 
faces. ``I did not,''she said. Another passenger, hailing from  a 
town  near  Mumbai  who requested anonymity, told  The  Hindu  he 
recognised  the  persons  in the pictures released  by  the  Home 
Minister  saying  he  had seen them in the  departure  lounge  of 
Kathmandu  International  Airport and also onboard  the  aircraft 
before they put on masks.

The doctor said a Nepali passenger, Mr. Gopal Tamrakar, had  shot 
a  video  film of some of the goings-on in the plane  which  were 
shown  on a private television channel on Tuesday. ``These  clips 
give  clinching evidence for establishing the identities  of  the 
hijackers,'' she said.

Dr. Joshi is based in Nainital (Uttar Pradesh) and not in  Mumbai 
and is a practising pathologist and not a physician. She has been 
forthcoming  about her traumatic experience, having come  out  of 
the  after-effects, but the same is apparently not the case  with 
other passengers. They and their relatives are still dreading the 
incident and do not feel secure in view of the widespread network 
of  the ISI agents in the country. Their fears are  augmented  by 
the  findings of the Mumbai police that two Pakistani  nationals, 
one  Indian  and one Nepali - both ISI agents - had  made  Mumbai 
their  base to provide all back-up, logistics  and  communication 
services to the hijackers. The hostages could still be under  the 
spell of the Stockholm syndrome.

She  said  that  officers of an Indian  intelligence  agency  had 
interviewed  her and two other women passengers,  including  Mrs. 
R.I.  Tolia whose husband is a senior IAS officer.  The  officers 
obtained from them whatever description they could provide of the 
hijackers ``on the bases of a few glimpses''. All passengers  had 
something to add to complete the profiles. Dr. Joshi had  several 
interactions with the hijackers as she was often asked to  attend 
on  the sick hostages. But never did a hijacker meet her  without 
his  mask on. They would call her ``Didi,''(elder sister).  Other 
ladies  were  called  ``Auntie'', ``Mummy''  and  some  men  even  
``Bhaiyya'' (brother).

``But  the  niceties were to keep the passengers  calm  and  that 
showed  that  they had training in psychology,''  she  said.  The 
hijackers  did  not want any problem on board that  could  divert 
their  attention  or  make  any demand  on  them.  The  hijackers 
presented  their  `kind  face' in ample measure  to  prevent  the 
hostages from retaliating, she said.
