
Fresh demand for Ongole bulls in Brazil


By T. Lakshmipathi

HYDERABAD, JAN. 12. Brazilians have again set their sights on the 
magnificent  Ongole bull which helped transform their economy  in 
the late Fifties.

A  team of parliamentarians, agricultural scientists  and  cattle 
breeders  from Brazil is currently on a tour of  Andhra  Pradesh, 
the  homeland  of  the  rare breed, in  pursuit  of  an  exchange 
programme to improve their cattle wealth.

The mission is aimed at paving way for lifting the ban on  export 
of  Indian livestock imposed in 1962 as the prized  animals  were 
moved out of the country by enterprising breeders from Brazil and 
other nations. 

After  enriching  its cattle with the Indian breeds,  Brazil  too 
imposed the ban on imports from India on sanitary grounds as  the 
Brazilian  cattle  was found to be more susceptible to  foot  and 
mouth and rinderpest diseases.

With the ban in both the countries, there was no way fresh  blood 
could be ``officially'' introduced into Brazil and it had set off 
clandestine  semen  movements  from India  to  Latin  America  by 
Brazilian cattle importers. 

Of  the 30 cattle breeds in India, nine were introduced  in  many 
countries.  But  it  is the Ongoles, that are  bred  in  greatest 
numbers and most widely distributed in many countries,  according 
to  Mr.  M.  Narendranath, a cattle breeder  and  member  of  the 
monitoring  committee of the Ongle Cattle Geram Plasm project  of 
Acharya N. G. Ranga Agricultural University (ANGRAU) here. 

South  American  countries  keep Ongoles  pure.  Brazil  imported 
Ongoles first in 1875. In 1906, a large contingent of 200  Ongole 
cows  and bulls were brought to Uberaba in Brazil.  Again  during 
1961-62,  Brazilians purchased 107 Ongole cows and a  few  bulls. 
The  Karvadi  bull, the show champion at an  All-India  Livestock 
Show at Madras in 1976, was part of the contingent. The semen  of 
the bull gave birth to more than 50,000 calves in Brazil.

The irony of the story is that Brazil accounts for as many as 120 
million  Ongle breed cattle (against its total cattle  wealth  of 
180 million) while the homeland of the breed has a meagre 35 lakh 
Ongoles  of  which  the pure breed accounts for  only  five  lakh 
animals.  The  cattle  population of  Andhra  Pradesh  itself  is 
comparatively low at 10 million.

But  the  Ongole breed, of late, has shown  decline  in  numbers, 
breed  characters and milk yield in its homeland. In  the  Indian 
context,  the breed is prized for its milk yield as  each  Ongole  
cow yields 4 kg of milk a day on an average. One year old  Ongole 
male sells for Rs. 5,000 to Rs. 10,000. 

The  Ongole cattle breeders had begun to organise  themselves  by 
forming  an  association  as early as in  1951.  A  Central  herd 
registration scheme is functioning at Ongole since 1978 with  the 
objective of survey of breeding tract, location of milk recording 
units,  registration  of animals. Presently  its  operations  are 
limited to Prakasam and Guntur districts.

In the post-ban era, a few Brazilian breeders maintained stock in 
India,  having  developed strong bonds with  Indian  agents,  who 
periodically visited the ongle breeding area and located superior 
Ongole  stock. Pictures of these bulls were sent to Brazil.  Once 
approved,  these  animals  were bought and  taken  by  trucks  to 
unknown  destinations, the local cattle breeders admit.  All  the 
prized animals thus found their way out of the country.

The  implications  of  lifting  the  ban  are  being  studied  by 
scientists  of ANGRAU which is implementing a Germ Plasm  Project 
at the Livestock Research Station at Lam in Guntur district.  The 
scientists  agree that if the ban goes in Brazil, there  will  be 
nothing  left as the Brazilian breeders boast of owning the  best 
animals in India. A mutually beneficial programme could be worked 
out by forcing the Brazilian Government to come out with the plan 
to  allow only import of semen processed at pre- designated  bull 
studs  in  India,  as is being done in the  case  of  semen  from 
Brazilian bulls to the U.S. 

Against  this backdrop, the visit of the Brazilian  team  assumes 
significance.  The  team leader, Mr. Abelardo  Lupion,  MP,  says 
Brazil  is keen on lifting the ban and their visit is to  satisfy 
themselves with the improved sanitary conditions in the  breeding 
area.  ``Ongole  bull is a jewel among the Brazilian  cattle.  We 
look forward to mutual cooperation in improving the breed,'' says 
Prof. Jackson Progencal Testa, Vice-Chancellor of the  University 
of  Londrina  in  Brazil. ``The  exchange  programme  would  also 
benefit  us by obtaining the improved germ plasm from  Brazil  to 
substantially  step  up the milk production,'' echoed Dr.  I.  V. 
Subba Rao, Vice- Chancellor of ANGAU. 
