
Hasan Tiro rejects Wahid's offer


By P. S. Suryanarayana 

SINGAPORE,  JAN.  12. The Indonesian President,  Mr.  Abdurrahman 
Wahid,  today reaffirmed his opposition to the move by a  section 
of  Islamists to wage a `holy war' against the Christians in  the 
country's  Spice Islands. The Indonesian Air Force and  the  Navy 
today intensified their surveillance of the areas affected by the 
recent  waves  of communal clashes, even as  independent  reports 
spoke  of another 21 deaths, this time in Seram in the  chain  of 
Spice isles.

On  another  front,  the separatist leader  of  Indonesia's  Aceh 
province,  Mr.  Teuku Hasan Tiro, who lives in exile  in  Sweden, 
today rejected the President's offer of a conditional clemency. A 
political  version in Jakarta, attributed to a spokesman  of  the 
Free Aceh Movement (GAM), was that Mr. Hasan Tiro would not  also 
attend  a special congress proposed by the Indonesian  Government 
for  a  broad-spectrum discussion of the ways to  resolve  Aceh's 
disaffection  with Jakarta. The conference is planned to be  held 
in Medan in a Sumatran province adjoining Aceh on January 25, and 
its stated purpose is to seek national reconciliation.

Mr. Wahid's offer of clemency to Mr. Hasan Tiro is conditional on 
the  latter  returning  to Indonesia and  pledging  to  work  for 
national  reconciliation  in  the  specific  context  of   Aceh's 
grievances.  The  GAM rebel leader is said to have  rejected  the 
notion  of Jakarta providing him with security guarantees in  the 
event of his agreeing to return to Indonesia at this time. As  in 
the case of Ambon in the Spice Isles, the demand in Aceh is  that 
any security guarantess could be credible only if offered by  the 
United Nations.

Oil-rich  Aceh,  which  lies close to  India's  eastern  maritime 
boundary,  has  been the theatre of separatist violence  and  the 
related security operations for a number of years, with  Islamist 
extremists wanting to liberate the province from Indonesia.
