
Even in dilemma there is hope


By Gautaman Bhaskaran

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 12. The International Film  Festival  of  India 
opened  here with a Cuban movie, and if memory serves  right,  it 
was  the first time in a decade or more that the  Latin  American 
country was bestowed with this honour.

While   the  Festival  Director,  Mrs  Malti  Sahai,  missed   no 
opportunity in reminding her listeners that the Cuban entry, Life 
is to Whistle, had won several accolades at the Havana  Festival, 
she kept one vital fact away from the media and others. It was  a 
1998  picture,  and,  of course, there can be no  debate  on  how 
prudent  it  is to unroll a festival with something as  dated  as 
this. It is well know that no major festival would ever do this.

However, there was a saving grace. Fernando Perez had done a neat 
job with his Life is to Whistle. It is a satirical tale of  three 
immensely  different characters - a ballerina, a petty thief  and 
an assistant who looks after the elderly in a home. It is  almost 
comic  to see the dancer pledge her excessive sexual urge to  God 
in  return for a role she dreams about. The thief's  idiosyncrasy 
is  as profound as it is humorous: he is obsessed with the  women 
whose handbags he steals. The assistant is torn between guilt and 
religion,  and  faints every time she hears the word  `sex'.  And 
when  their lives merge, there is a sweet lyrical  quality  about 
the screen.

Life  is to Whistle, may appear joyless as the first frames  whiz 
past,  but as the director tells this writer during an  exclusive 
interview  that  ``more often than not life is to  whistle  away. 
There is hope even in misery and dilemma''.

Perez,  who worked with the Cuban auteur, Tomas  Alea,  considers 
him  his  teacher,  and  says that he  was  moved  especially  by 
Memories  of  Underdevelopment,  which in the  early  1960s  gave 
political  cinema a dramatic twist. ``It was also the first  time 
that  I  saw  a  great movie-maker work  with  actors,  with  the 
camera...So  involved was he with his creation,'' Perez  idolises 
his hero.

He avers that his guru gave him answers to many of the  questions 
that   troubled   him.  Strawberry  and   Chocolate   looked   at 
homosexuality with rare candour and empathy. Memories...taught us 
to look at reality with dispassionate subjectivity.

Although the Festival's opening shot, Life is to Whistle has been 
deeply influenced by Alea, Perez says with disarming honesty that 
``I have been moved by the work of many people. I love  Hitchcock 
cinema.  I love Spielberg cinema. I love Bergman cinema.  I  love 
cinema.''

Obviously,  for  Perez the medium then  automatically  translates 
into an extension of life itself. Life is to Whistle is not  just 
an allegory on our existence, but deeply underlines our  ironies. 
``Sometimes  I  feel that life is not only to whistle.  There  is 
something profound about it. But that should not take away a  man 
from being happy. Life is undoubtedly complex.''

Perez's film captures such predicament with nostalgic sorrow. For 
Cuba,  for the illogic of reality, for the irrationality  of  war 
and  fanaticism, for poverty and so. ``I sometimes wonder  why  I 
live in a world like. I consider myself to be a good man. I  have 
good feelings, and am disturbed by all the evil and selfishness I 
see around,'' Perez concludes. 

He  creates an atmosphere of hope even in those scenes that  talk 
of despair. His humility and childlike innocence seem to  suggest 
that  here is a man committed to goodness, committed  to  driving 
away the dark forces threatening to mess our lives.
