
Israel to withdraw further from West Bank


JERUSALEM,   JAN.  12.The  Israeli  Government   told   Palestine 
yesterday  that  it would pull out of more of the West  Bank  and 
Gaza  Strip by September, even if a final peace agreement is  not 
reached  by the deadline that month, officials said. ``Israel  is 
committed  to  implementing the  third-phase  withdrawal  whether 
there is a final status agreement or not,'' the chief Palestinian 
negotiator, Mr. Saeb Erekat, told mediapersons after meeting  his 
Israeli counterpart, Mr. Oded Eran yesterday. 

Israel and Palestine are negotiating a framework accord in  order 
to achieve a final peace agreement by September. The talks should 
tackle the neighboring states' most thorny issues, including  the 
fate  of Jerusalem, Jewish settlements, border negotiations,  and 
the millions of Palestinian refugees.

As Mr. Eran's office said, ``It's true. The decision (on a  final 
pullout)  will be taken by Israel between the period of  February 
and  September.'' Mr. Erekat said, however, that when  and  where 
the final pullout would take place had not yet been decided. 

Israel  is  to withdraw from a further 6.1 per cent of  the  West 
Bank on January 20, following last week's pullout from 5 per cent 
of  the  territory. The last handover, mandated  by  a  September 
interim  peace deal, was to have taken place on November 15,  but 
was  delayed  by  a  row  between  the  Israeli  and  Palestinian 
negotiators  over which areas should be included in the  pullout. 
The  deadlock  was reportedly broken last week, with  an  Israeli 
consultation  with the Palestinians on the land to be  considered 
in the next withdrawal phase. 

With the completion of the January 20 handover, Palestinians will 
be  in full or partial control of 40 per cent of the  West  Bank, 
which Israel captured from Jordan in its 1967 West Asia war.  The 
Palestinians  want all of the West Bank and Gaza Strip,  most  of 
which  they  already control, for a future independent  state.  

- Reuters
