
Indian captain made a scapegoat for oilspill?


By Vaiju Naravane

PARIS, JAN.12. ``On Saturday, December 11, at around 12.40 when I 
was  on deck with the second Lieutenant, I noticed that the  ship 
was  listing on the starboard side,'' Capt. Karun Sundar  Mathur, 
master  of the tanker, Erika, which broke up on December  13,  is 
quoted as saying.

Two  hours  later  ``I  went up on the bridge  and  I  saw  three 
fissures  near the second tank on the starboard side. There  were 
three  rows of fissures, the biggest over 2.5 mts  long.''  Capt. 
Mathur decided not to continue with the journey, but to reach the 
closest  port while trying to take the pressure off  the  bridge, 
the French newspaperLe Monde reported today, quoting an  experts' 
report submitted to the commercial court in Dunkirk.

The  paper  citing  the same report also  said  the  captain  had 
noticed  ``corrosion  at the base of the compartments''  when  he 
inspected  the ship in Russia on November 9. A second  inspection 
on  November 22 revealed a second zone of corrosion. The  Italian 
classification company, RINA, still went ahead and certified  the 
tanker as being seaworthy,Le Monde alleged.

On Sunday December 13, the Erika broke into two off the coast  of 
Brittany causing the worst oil spill in French history. The story 
has all the elements of a crime fiction. An oil tanker breaks  up 
off the French coast and causes a huge oil spill. The captain, an 
Indian,  is arrested, then given a conditional release. Very  big 
money is involved - several hundred million dollars. The ship was 
flying the Maltese flag, its owners are allegedly Italian,  well-
hidden  by a mesh of paper off-shore companies. And police  would 
like to know if the ship genuinely passed the required tests  for 
seaworthiness  or if its certificates were delivered  by  corrupt 
Italian classification officials.

Why  did a giant like Totalfina charter such a vessel  which  did 
not even have the obligatory double hull ? Should a 25-  year-old 
tub have been allowed to carry such dangerous cargo?

The  ship's  owners have allegedly gone bust, rival  lawyers  are 
squabbling  over  who  really represents  the  interests  of  the 
captain  and  there have been inspired leaks in the  press  on  a 
matter which is still sub-judice.

Capt. Mathur, is a key figure in the controversy and is in danger 
of  being  made  a scapegoat. He has been  charged  with  causing 
marine  pollution  and endangering human life  and  if  convicted 
could  face  several  years  in prison.  His  passport  has  been 
confiscated  and he is not free to leave India until the  enquiry 
is complete.

Le Monde obtained copies of a statement Capt. Mathur made to Jean 
Paul  Christophe,  a maritime expert, who was  appointed  by  the 
commercial  court  in the battle opposing the ship's  owners  and 
Totalfina, which had chartered the tanker.

``We disapprove of the report being leaked and I shall demand  an 
explanation  from  Mr.  Christophe,''  Jean  Paul  Levy,  Captain 
Mathur's lawyer told The Hindu.

The  Hinduhad been called by another lawyer, Ms. Sandra Lamy  who 
claimed  she was representing the interests of Capt.  Mathur  and 
asking  this  correspondent to ``keep off the  captain.''  Lawyer 
Levy  now claims that Ms. Lamy represents the management  company 
involved , Panship Management of Ravenna, in Italy and that ``she 
does not have captain Mathur's interests at heart.''

Meanwhile,  Capt.  Jamshed  J. Appoo, who  runs  Herald  Maritime 
Services, the agency which provided the crew to the Erika  claims 
to  have ``lost $235,000.' He told The Hindu over phone that  the 
owners,  a Napolitan family called Savarese had  declared  itself 
bust.  ``I have not received a penny from them and am not  likely 
to,'' he said. Panship Management, technical agency which was  in 
charge of the Erika's technical performance has reportedly  filed 
an injunction for the seizure in Augusta, Sicily of another  ship 
belonging to the Savarese family.

The  Erika, which spilled over 14,000 tonnes of fuel oil  causing 
one  of the worst ecological disasters Europe has known  and  has 
now sprung two new leaks, is in the middle of a controversy about 
its ownership and seaworthiness.
