
U.S. to seek censure of China


WASHINGTON, JAN. 12. The United States has decided to introduce a 
resolution criticising China at the United Nations Commission  on 
Human  Rights in Geneva later this year citing its  deteriorating 
human rights performance.

The   State   Department  spokesman,  Mr.   James   Rubin,   told 
mediapersons at his daily press briefing on Tuesday that the U.S. 
would back the resolution in March because of China's poor  human 
rights practices, referring to restrictions on freedom of speech, 
dissent  and  religion. ``The decision to go  forward  with  this 
resolution  at  the  commission is based on  the  fact  that  the 
Government  of  China's  human rights  record  has  continued  to 
deteriorate,'' he stated.

``Over  the  past year, the Government of China  intensified  its 
crackdown on political dissent, initiated a campaign to  suppress 
the Falun Gong, and intensified controls on unregistered Churches 
and  on  political and religious expression  of  ethnic  minority 
groups,  especially  Tibetans.  Controls on  the  media  and  the 
Internet have also been tightened,'' Mr. Rubin said.

Noting  in particular the issue of Tibet and the  high-  ranking, 
14-year-old  Karmapa  Lama who trekked to India  last  week,  Mr. 
Rubin  said  restrictions  on  freedom  of  speech,  dissent  and 
religion  had  motivated the U.S. decision.  ``We  are  concerned 
about reports that the monastery from which the Karmapa Lama fled 
has been raided and that two monks have been arrested,'' he said. 
``We  have  long  been deeply disturbed about  the  human  rights 
situation  in  Tibet and particularly the tight  restrictions  on 
Tibetan Buddhism''.

Asked  whether he had informed China in advance, Mr. Rubin  said, 
``Well,  China  historically does not respond well  to  decisions 
like this. But the fact that China doesn't want us to go  forward 
is  not,  in our view, an obstacle to our pursuing  a  matter  of 
principle like this.'' Responding to another question whether the 
U.S.  would rescind its decision to introduce the  resolution  if 
China  were  to ratify the International Covenant  on  Civil  and 
Political  rights,  he replied that the convention was  just  one 
factor  and  ``unless there are concrete steps to  improve  human 
rights situation,'' the U.S. would go ahead with its decision.  

- UNI, PTI
