
Jaswant, Cook talks may cover nuclear issues


By Thomas Abraham

LONDON, JAN. 12. The Exernal Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, 
is  to arrive in London from Rome tonight for an  extended  visit 
during which he will hold bilateral talks with Britain and resume 
his dialogue with the U.S. Deputy Secretary of State, Mr.  Strobe 
Talbott.

Mr.  Singh will begin with two days of meetings with his  British 
counterpart, Mr. Robin Cook, and other senior British  Ministers. 
This  is the External Affair Minister's second official visit  to 
Britain,  and is part of the growing cooperation between the  two 
countries on a range of issues.

For  example, during the recent hostage crisis, Mr Jaswant  Singh 
telephoned  Mr.  Cook,  and officials from  both  sides  were  in 
contact  with  each  other.  Britain  has  condemend  the  recent 
hijacking of the Indian Airlines aircraft in no uncertain  terms, 
and the situation in the region following the Pakistani coup will 
be on the agenda.

India  had been trying to maintain international pressure on  the 
military  regime, and Mr. Singh will no doubt make this point  to 
his British counterpart. Britain has adopted a policy of  limited 
engagement  with  the  regime  in order  to  encourage  an  early 
restoration of democracy, and the British chief of Defence Staff, 
Sir Charles Guthrie, is on his way to Pakistan. India and Britain 
have a regular dialogue on nuclear issues at both the ministerial 
and official level, and Mr. Singh and Mr. Cook will continue this 
process.  There are also pressures within the British  Government 
to  resume  arms  sales to Pakistan, as shown  by  minutes  of  a 
Government meeting published in The Guardian newspaper. According 
to The Guardian, the Defence Minister, and the Trade and Industry 
Ministers  were in favour of restarting sales, while the  Foreign 
Office  and  the International Deevelopment  Ministries  were  in 
favour of keeping the informal ban on arms exports. There are  80 
pending  applications  from  manufacturers who wish  to  sell  to 
Pakistan.

Mr. Jaswant Singh will also be meeting the Defence Minister,  Mr. 
Geoff  Hoon,  where  this  could  figure.  The  External  Affairs 
Minister  will  also  meet the Deputy Prime  Minister,  Mr.  John 
Prescott.

During  his  last  visit  a year ago,  both  sides  had  extended 
invitations  for  a  Prime Ministerial visit.  Mr.  Vajpayee  had 
invited Mr. Blair to visit India at an early date, and Mr.  Blair 
had  reciprocated.  There has been no further  movement  in  this 
direction,  but  the  two Ministers could  move  towards  setting 
definite dates.

On  Monday,  Mr. Jaswant Singh will begin the 10th round  of  the 
Indo-U.S.  nuclear  dialogue with Mr. Strobe  Talbott.  The  last 
round  held  here did not make any significant  progress  towards 
resolving   issues   such  as  the  India's  signature   of   the 
Comprehensive  Test  Ban Treaty and the U.S. export  controls  on 
nuclear  technology to India. Since then, officials from the  two 
sides  have  met in Washington to try and take  matters  forward. 
Both  sides  want to see progress ahead of the  U.S.  President's 
planned visit to India this year.
