
Pinochet may be allowed to return home


By Thomas Abraham

LONDON,  JAN.  12.  The former  Chilean  dictator,  Gen.  Augusto 
Pinochet,  may  be  allowed  to return to  Chile  due  to  health 
reasons,   the  British  Government  has  announced.  This   will 
effectively end the 15-month long legal battle that Gen. Pinochet 
has  been  waging  to avoid facing trial in  Spain  for  acts  of 
torture committed during his period in power in Chile. 

The  decision came after a panel of doctors examined the  84-year 
old General and concluded that he was ``at present unfit to stand 
trial, and that no change to that position can be expected.'' The 
British Home Secretary, Mr. Jack Straw, said based on the medical 
report, he was ``minded'' not to extradite Gen. Pinochet. He said 
before taking a final decision to release Gen. Pinochet, he would 
give a week for the Spanish judge, Mr. Balthazar Garzon and human 
rights  groups  such  as  Amnesty  International,  to  make   any 
representations against letting the former dictator go.

The extradition case has broken new legal ground since it is  the 
first  time that action has been taken against anyone  under  the 
International Convention on Torture, which allows third countries 
to  take  action against suspected torturers. While  the  Chilean 
Government,  which  has  been  campaigning  for  Gen.  Pinochet's 
release,  welcomed the news, human rights groups reacted  angrily 
and demanded a judicial review of the Home Secretary's  decision. 
``Any  decision  by Mr. Jack Straw to release  Gen.  Pinochet  on 
health grounds should be subject to immediate judicial  review,'' 
said Ms. Helen Banber, director of the Medical Foundation for the 
Care of Victims of Torture. 

Amnesty  International  said it was examining the  possibilty  of 
getting  Gen. Pinochet tried in Britain under  the  International 
Convention  against  Torture. Many Labour M.P.s,  who  have  been 
campaigning to bring Gen. Pinochet to trial, also expressed their 
dismay. ``This is monstrous. There will be a lot of cocnern among 
the public about this,'' said Ms. Diane Abbot, M.P. for  Hackney. 
Another M.P. who has been a vocal opponent of Gen. Pinochet,  Mr. 
Jeremy  Corbyn, said the former leader's age was irrelevant.  ``I 
don't think that age should be important. Nazi war criminals have 
been tried no matter how old they are - why not Gen.  Pinochet?'' 
He  said it was likely that the Home Secretary's  decision  would 
face a legal challenge. 

The  Conservative  party,  which  has  supported  Gen.  Pinochet, 
welcomed  the  decision. Lord Lamont, a prominent member  of  the 
campaign to release the general, said ``It has never been in  the 
interests of justice that Gen. Pinochet should be tried in Europe 
- this has always been a matter for Chile.'' Mr. Gerald  Howarth, 
another Pinochet supporter, said it had been a ``despicable act'' 
for  Britain to have taken Gen. Pinochet into custody. The  whole  
affair  had  been  ``  an  extraordinary  fiasco  from  start  to 
finish,'' he said.

Gen. Pinochet was arrested in London in October 1998, while on  a 
private  visit  to  this  country. The arrest  was  based  on  an 
extradition  order  from the Spanish  magistrate,  Mr.  Balthazar 
Garzon,  who had been compiling evidence of torture,  murder  and 
illegal   imprisonment   during   Gen.   Pinochet's    right-wing 
dicatorship  in  Chile. Gen. Pinochet appealed to  the  House  of 
Lords   twice   against  the  extradition  order  but   lost.   A 
magistrate's court which heard the case ruled that Gen.  Pinochet 
could be legally extradited. 

The  British  Home  Secretary, who has  the  final  authority  in 
extradition  cases,  then ordered a medical examination  of  Gen. 
Pinochet,  following represenations form the  Chilean  Government 
that  he was unfit to stand trial. The examination by a panel  of 
independent  experts,  found  that  his  physical  condition  had 
deteriorated over the last few months and ruled that he was unfit 
to  stand trial. Gen. Pinochet has been under house arrest  in  a 
mansion  in Surrey, an upmarket suburb south-west of London,  for 
most of his period in Britain.

The  British  Government,  which  saw  a  deterioration  in   its 
relations  with  Chile, would clearly like to see  Gen.  Pinochet 
leave the country. Britain will, above all, not want to have  the 
ailing General die in this country.
