
U.S. senators to visit Pak.


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD,  JAN. 12 For the first time since the coup in  October 
last  year, American Senators are arriving in Pakistan to  engage 
the military leadership on a host of issues including  terrorism, 
a return to democracy, the CTBT and other U.S. concerns.

While a four-member U.S. Senate delegation led by Mr. Tom Daschle 
arrived  tomorrow for a three-day visit, Senator  Sam  Brownback, 
whose  responsibilities directly concern South Asia,  arrives  on 
Saturday. 

``During  their visit, the U.S. Senators will  discuss  important 
bilateral  and  multilateral foreign policy and  security  issues 
with  the  Pakistani  leadership,'' a  statement  issued  by  the 
Pakistani Foreign Ministry on the Daschle-led delegation said. 

``The U.S. Senate delegation's visit is important as it would  be 
the first Congressional visit after the change of Government last 
October.  It  will provide the U.S. Senators  an  opportunity  to 
obtain  a  better  understanding  of  the  Pakistan  Government's 
policies and priorities and the measures being taken for economic 
revival,   rebuilding   of  institutions,   democratisation   and 
establishment of rule of law,'' the statement added. 

In  another development, the Foreign Minister, Mr. Abdul  Sattar, 
has  denied questioning the ``integrity and patriotism'' of  Qazi 
Hussain  Ahmed,  Jamaat-i-Islami chief, as part of  the  military 
government's pro-CTBT campaign. 

This clarification came after Mr. Sattar was quoted as saying  in 
The  News  today about the Qazi that the  ``nation  cannot  allow 
those  to  issue  certificate of treason (sic)  who  had  opposed 
creation of Pakistan''.

``Foreign  Minister  Abdul Sattar protested about the  charge  of 
`treason'   against  those  who  support  the  signing   of   the 
Comprehensive  Nuclear  Test Ban Treaty....nor did  he  make  any 
comment  in  any conversation on the  stance  of  Jamaat-i-Islami 
prior to 1947,'' a Foreign Ministry statement said. 

``There  is no warrant for emotionalising the debate on the  CTBT 
which  may not even come into force....the nation should  discuss 
and  debate the merits. Only thus, he (Mr. Sattar) believes,  can 
we rise above slogans to a higher and more sophisticated level of 
understanding of the requirements of our national interest,'' the 
statement said. 

``The Government is determined to maintain and develop Pakistan's 
nuclear  capability  in order to ensure a credible  and  reliable 
deterrence against manifest threats to is security....when and if  
the  CTBT comes into force, every State will be bound to  refrain 
from  conducting  any  nuclear test explosions.  If,  before  the 
Treaty comes into force, another State conducts a test explosion, 
Pakistan  too  will  have the option to  do  so  irrespective  of 
whether it has signed the Treaty or not,'' it added.
