
Malaysia for end to curbs on Iraq


By P. S. Suryanarayana 

SINGAPORE,  JAN. 12. Malaysia today undertook a major  diplomatic 
initiative in its capacity as a non-permanent member of the  U.N. 
Security Council by pledging sustained support for Baghdad in its 
efforts to secure a comprehensive and permanent revocation of the 
global  organisation's  prolonged  sanctions on  Iraq.  This  was 
disclosed  at  the  end  of talks in  Kuala  Lumpur  between  the 
Malaysian  Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Abdullah Ahmad Badawi,  and 
his Iraqi counterpart, Mr. Tariq Aziz.

The  talks focussed on the latest Security Council resolution  to 
form  UNMOVIC  (U.N.  Monitoring,  Verification  and   Inspection 
Commission),  and the ways in which Malaysia could  help  Baghdad 
within the parameters of the world body's oil-for-food  programme 
concerning Iraq.

According  to the Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister,  who  stressed 
the importance of Iraq's cooperation for the success of UNMOVIC's 
mission,  Baghdad is currently averse to certain aspects  of  the 
Commission's  mandate  perceived  to be in  conflict  with  Iraqi 
national  interests.  Mr. Aziz indicated, however,  that  Baghdad 
could  still  cooperate with UNMOVIC if  Iraq's  sovereignty  and 
security were not likely to be compromised in the process.

Malaysia had joined a few permanent members of the U.N.  Security 
Council in abstaining from voting last month, when the resolution 
on UNMOVIC was adopted in New York. Malaysia's support for  Iraq, 
as indicated in today's talks, is in line with recent comments by 
the Malaysian Prime Minister, Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, that the U.N. 
had  set a bad precedent by holding the people of Iraq  virtually 
hostage  in its bid to secure the fall of one person, namely  Mr. 
Saddam Hussein.

Meanwhile, the Malaysian police today arrested and later released 
on  bail  two Opposition activists. According  to  the  Malaysian 
State-run  news  agency, Ms. Marina Yusoff,  Vice-  President  of 
Parti Keadilan Nasional (National Justice Party) surrendered at a 
police  station in Kuala Lumpur, facing an arrest warrant  issued 
against  her for a speech in which she allegedly  made  seditious 
remarks. 

The  contentious remarks are said to pertain to the alleged  role 
of the police during the riots of 1969, a very sensitive  subject 
in Malaysian politics. According to a police official, Ms. Yusoff 
was later released on bail. 

The  National  Justice  Party is headed by  Ms.  Wan  Azizah  Wan 
Ismail,  wife  of the jailed political leader and  former  Deputy 
Prime  Minister, Mr. Anwar Ibrahim. The Party indicated  that  it 
remained  steadfast in its resolve to fight for  change,  despite  
today's developments.
