
New turn in probe into plot against Chandrika


By V. S. Sambandan

COLOMBO,  JAN.  12.  The alleged `wider  conspiracy'  behind  the 
failed  assassination  attempt on the Sri Lankan  President,  Ms. 
Chandrika  Kumaratunga on December 18, has taken a new turn  with 
the island's police reportedly questioning ``the head of a  state 
media institution.''

The  state-run Daily News, which reported the `wider  conspiracy' 
angle a couple of days ago, today said that the head of the state 
media  institution  was  quizzed  by  CID  sleuths  probing   the 
assassination attempt.

``The  parameters  for questioning are the manner  in  which  the 
particular section of the state media was used to facilitate  the 
plot to assassinate the President,'' the newspaper said,  adding, 
``the questioning has thrown light on many connected matters  and 
has been very helpful for further investigations.''

The  `wider  conspiracy' angle to the failed attempt by  a  woman 
suicide bomber on December 19, as reported in the Daily News  and 
the  state-run  electronic media, is that sections  of  the  Army 
would  have  stepped  in  in  the  aftermath  of  the   attempted 
assassination  of  the President, in the event  the  killing  was 
carried out, resulting in a military takeover of the island. 

While  the  reports have been confined to the  state-  media,  no 
evidence  has so far been given, with the newsreports basing  its 
reports on ``CID sources.'' 

Also  reported  was the charge that sections of  the  Opposition, 
business  community and the press, were involved in the plot.  It 
may  be recalled that on Sunday, the sister of a businessman  was 
taken  in for questioning by the CID for the alleged  involvement 
in the assassination attempt. The state media had also said  that 
editors of two week-end newspapers could also be questioned.

Concern  has  been expressed by the  opposition  United  National 
Party  (UNP) and the Free Media Movement (FMM) on the  manner  in 
which  the  investigations  are progressing. The  Leader  of  the 
Opposition,  Mr.  Ranil Wickremesinghe, today demanded  that  the 
Government  come  out  with a statement on  its  ``commitment  to 
ensure media freedom and uphold the democratic process of  law.'' 
Stating  that  the  December  18  blast  has  to  be  ``certainly 
investigated,''    he   called   for   a   distinction    between 
investigations and ``fabrication.'' 

Recalling  the President's December 3, TV programme in which  she 
named  a couple of editors as those who were opposed to  her  and 
the  subsequent report in the state-media, the Opposition  leader 
said there was a ``new climate of repression on media freedom  in  
the last few weeks.''

The  attempts  were  also  to  ``pressurise  the  media  for  not 
supporting the UNP,'' he said, reiterating his party's commitment 
to strengthen media freedom through parliamentary methods. 

Call for public funding of parties

The Opposition leader also called for the introduction of  public 
funding  of  political  parties.  Referring  to  charges  by  the 
President  that some business groups were funding the  Opposition 
UNP,  Mr.  Wickremesinghe said there was the  need  for  ``public 
funding''  of political parties ``with  accountability,''  citing 
the  examples  of  Germany and the U.S. The  call  comes  in  the 
backdrop  of state-media reports linking certain business  houses 
which had funded the UNP as well as the banned LTTE to the `wider 
conspiracy.' 

Adding  that it businessmen as well as journalists were in  touch 
with  both  the  ruling  People's  Alliance  and  the  UNP,   Mr. 
Wickremesinghe  said  ``being  in  touch  with  the  UNP  is   no 
offence.''
