
Algerian Islamic group lays down arms


By Kesava Menon

MANAMA  (BAHRAIN) JAN. 12. With the Islamic Salvation Army  (AIS) 
having  dissolved itself, there is scope for great optimism  that 
Algeria's  cycle of violence can come to an end. Some members  of 
the  AIS  are  to help the security forces and  this  raises  the 
possibility  that  the militants remaining in the  field  can  be 
brought   to  brook.  Perhaps  more  importantly,  the   Algerian 
Government's success in persuading the AIS and its political  arm 
the   Islamic  Salvation  Front  (FIS)  to  give   up   militancy 
demonstrates  that  the  President,  Mr.  Abdelaziz  Bouteflika's 
policy of ``peace and civic concord'' is working. 

Yesterday,  the  AIS  announced that  it  was  dissolving  itself 
following  a  blanket pardon granted to all its  members  by  Mr. 
Bouteflika. The Algerian President, who took office in April last 
year,  had  won endorsement for his policy of ``peace  and  civic 
concord''  in  a referendum held a few months later.  Under  this 
policy, a partial or complete amnesty was promised to all Islamic 
militants  who gave up the armed struggle by Jan. 13  this  year. 
The AIS had declared a unilateral ceasefire in 1997 and was known 
to  have by and large wound down its operations. But its  members 
had  not surrendered to the Government in large numbers till  the 
declaration of the new policy by Mr. Bouteflika. 

Following  the referendum, AIS members had surrendered in  droves 
but  the  ambiguity  about  the  full  and  partial  amnesty  had 
apparently  caused  some  vacillation later on and  the  AIS  had 
declared a freeze on the implementation of the earlier accord. In 
the  hiatus following the AIS decision to hold back  its  members 
from handing over their arms, fresh talks were held between  them 
and  the  Government  for the  past  several  weeks.  Yesterday's 
announcement  of  a  blanket pardon has  apparently  cleared  the 
confusion  about  the partial and full amnesty and  the  AIS  has 
consequently   decided  to  dissolve  itself.  According   to   a 
communique  from  the AIS, the organisation is  to  ``voluntarily 
hand in all their arms and military means in their possession  to 
the authorities.'' 

The  dissolution  of the AIS substantially means  that  the  main 
Islamic  political movement in Algeria, the FIS, has  decided  to 
give  up the armed struggle which they launched in 1992. The  FIS 
had resorted to militancy after the secular authorities cancelled 
elections  which  they  were poised to win.  In  is  actually  in 
reference  back to that election that the FIS can be  called  the 
main  Islamic force because the Islamic movement in  Algeria  had 
subsequently   splintered.  More  moderate  elements  among   the 
Islamists  had stayed loyal to FIS and its armed wing,  the  AIS, 
while  the  hard-core broke off to form the Armed  Islamic  Group 
(GIA).  Further  on, yet another extremist  group,  the  Salafist 
Group  for Preaching and Combat (GSPC), had also emerged  on  the  
scene. 

In  the shadowy world in which the eight-year cycle  of  violence 
has  been played out in Algeria, it has generally not  been  very 
clear  as to which groups, including security forces,  were  more 
responsible for the nearly 100,000 deaths that have been  caused. 
However,  the  GIA  which had earned  a  special  reputation  for 
brutality,  was  often identified as the  force  which  massacred 
innocents,  including  women  and children, in  the  most  brutal 
manner imaginable. There has also been much speculation that  the 
AIS and GIA have been fighting each other for the past few years. 

Some  of the surrendered AIS men are expected to co-operate  with 
the  security forces in the continuing fight against the GIA  and 
GSPC. There was a report last week that Antar Zoubari, the leader 
of   the  GIA  who  was  otherwise  believed  to  have  fled   to 
Afghanistan,  was spotted during an encounter between  his  group 
and  the  security forces. In hunting people  like  Zoubari,  the 
Algerian  Government  could  derive  some  assistance  from   the 
erstwhile AIS men though the degree and value of such  assistance 
is far from clear. 

While  the  overall picture of Algerian militancy in  the  1990's 
remains  murky, it would appear that most militants  belonged  to 
local groups which then affiliated to either of the armed  wings. 
Therefore,  a  person who belonged to a group affiliated  to  the 
broad  umbrella of the AIS might not necessarily know  the  hide-
outs, modus operandi of groups loyal to the GIA.

Though  the AIS dissolving itself represents a turning point,  it 
does  not mean that the violence in Algeria will come to  an  end 
very soon.
