
U.P. seeks higher share in divisible pool of taxes


By Our Special Correspondent

LUCKNOW,  JAN.  12.  The Uttar Pradesh Chief  Minister,  Mr.  Ram 
Prakash  Gupta, has demanded that the share of the States in  the 
divisible pool of Central taxes should be raised from 29 per cent 
to 33 per cent, out of which 30 per cent should come from Central 
gross tax revenue and 3 per cent from additional excise duty.

Addressing  a  team of the 11th Finance Commission on  a  two-day 
visit  to Uttar Pradesh, Mr. Gupta lamented that the  alternative 
scheme of devolution recommended by the Tenth Finance Commission, 
which was to be implemented with effect from April 1996, had  not 
been  implemented  so  far.  If this  had  been  implemented  the 
financial position of Uttar Pradesh would not have been worse. 

He urged the Commission to implement this scheme immediately  and 
continue  it  as  a main scheme during the  period  of  the  11th 
Finance  Commission. The additional excise duty, he said,  should 
not be merged with the basic excise duty and the rental agreement 
should continue.

Favouring  the population and backwardness criteria to  determine 
the  size of devolution, he proposed that 50 per cent  should  be 
distributed  on the basis of population, 25 per cent and  on  the 
basis of I.A.T.P. criteria and 25 per cent to those States  whose 
per  capital income was less than the national average.  On  this 
basis, the share of Uttar Pradesh be 20.8 per cent. 

Mr.   Gupta   regretted  that  despite  the  amendment   in   the 
Constitution  the  union, Government had not been  able  to  levy 
consignment  tax  through  legislation. So the  States  had  been 
deprived  of the most needed share of revenue. Uttar Pradesh  was 
anticipating substantial revenue if this tax was levied and hoped 
that the 11th Finance Commission would recommend this.

Mr.  Gupta  drew the attention of the Commission  to  the  severe 
fiscal  crisis  faced  by  the state and said  this  was  due  to 
increase in revenue expenditure without corresponding increase in 
revenue receipts. 

The  implementation of the Fifth Pay Commission's report  in  the 
State  had landed the State in this situation - an burden of  Rs. 
4,000 crores besides arrears of Rs. 1,000 crore.

During the Eighth Plan, the average economic growth rate of  U.P. 
remained  at  2.9  per cent per annum  as  against  the  national 
average of 6 per cent.

Uttar   Pradesh,  in  its  memorandum,  pleaded  that  the   1991 
population  figure  be  taken into  consideration  for  the  11th 
Finance Commission's recommendation. Besides, the loan and  grant  
ratio  be  changed from 70:30 to 30:70. Further,  the  states  be 
allowed  to  retain  the entire collection  under  small  savings 
schemes. Uttar Pradesh demanded a moratorium on accumulated loans 
for five years for the next financial year and repayment schedule 
as 20 years. 

The  state asked for 50 per cent waiver in the  payable  interest 
during 2000-2005 to the Centre. The state demanded creation of  a 
risk fund to take care of the fluctuation in the exchange  rates, 
on 50-50 per cent share basis.

It  demanded  Rs. 4,322 crores during 2000-2005 for  running  the 
civic services and their monitoring and Rs. 8,380 crore for their 
development. A sum of Rs. 3,525 crore for village panchayat,  Rs. 
412 for block panchayat and Rs. 273 crore for district panchayats 
had been sought. 

The  state asked for a central allocation of Rs. 3,000 crore  for 
development  of hill areas, Rs. 1,336 crore to deal with  poverty 
and floods problems Rs. 7225 for expansion of education,  medical 
and health, creation of new divisions and tehsils and for  better 
security  along Indo-Nepal and Tibet border to take care  of  the 
increasing  threat from ISI and along the U.P.- Bihar  and  U.P.-
M.P. border to deal with naxal and dacoit threat.
