
Nedunchezhiyan dies of heart failure


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 12. Former Tamil Nadu Finance Minister and  AIADMK 
chairman,  Mr.  V.R. Nedunchezhiyan, died of heart failure  at  a 
private hospital this evening.

The  79  year-old Dravidian movement leader was admitted  to  the 
Apollo  Hospitals after he complained of breathing  difficulties. 
He became critical yesterday and he was put on a cardiac  support 
system  with  balloon. However, there was no improvement  in  his 
condition and the end came at 7.20 p.m.

He  is survived by his wife, Dr. Visalakshi Nedunchezhian, and  a 
son. 

Expressing  grief, the AIADMK general secretary, Ms.  Jayalalitha 
said  in the death of Mr. Nedunchezhian, the  Dravidian  movement 
had  lost  its grandeur and the memory of the late  leader  would 
ever remain embedded in the history of Tamil Nadu. 

The  party will observe a three-day mourning from  tomorrow  when 
the  party flag will be flown at half mast. Later in  the  night, 
the  body  of  Mr. Nedunchezhian was moved to  his  residence  in 
Seethamma  Colony in the city where it will be kept for  partymen 
and  others to pay their last respects. The cremation  will  take 
place on January 14. 

Ms.  Jayalalitha, who paid floral homage, said the demise of  Mr. 
Nedunchezhian  was  an  irreparable loss to the  AIADMK.  He  had 
dedicated himself totally to the growth of the AIADMK.

She  felt anguished over the loss of her ``elder  brother''.  She 
hailed  him  as an embodiment of the Dravidian movement  and  its 
cherished ideals. He stood as an undaunting figure when the party 
faced challenges and crises. 

He  left  an  indelible  mark  in  the  portfolios  of   finance, 
education,  revenue  and  industries handled by  him  during  his 
ministerial  tenure. One of the ``five towering leaders'' of  the 
Anna era, Mr. Nedunchezhian, she said, was not only her political 
mentor  but  an  intimate  friend of MGR  and  he  will  be  ever 
remembered in the history of Tamil Nadu''.

She  said during his last days, Mr. Nedunchezhian was  expressing 
to  her  and his close friends his anguish over the acts  of  the 
present  day  rulers  in humiliating him by  hauling  him  before 
courts.

Earlier  in  the day, Ms. Jaylalitha, cutting short her  stay  in 
Hyderabad,  arrived  in  the city and  visited  the  hospital  to 
enquire  about  Mr.  Nedunchezhian's  health.  According  to  the  
hospital   Chairman,   Dr.   P.C.   Reddy,   Mr.    Nedunchezhian 
``emotionally  responded with tears'' when Ms.  Jayalalitha  told 
him  that the entire party was behind him and wished  him  speedy 
recovery.

The  Governor,  Ms.  Fathima Beevi, the Chief  Minister,  Mr.  M. 
Karunanidhi,  and leaders of various political  parties  condoled 
his death.

Born  at  Thirukkannapuram  near Pattukottai on  July  11,  1920, 
Nedunchezhiyan was initiated into politics during his days at the 
Annamalai  University. He joined the Dravidar Kazhagam  in  1944, 
but,  along  with C.N. Annadurai, moved over to form the  DMK  in 
1949. Under the leadership of Annadurai, he served as the  deputy 
general  secretary from 1949 to 1955, as general  secretary  from 
1955  to  1961, and as chairman of the DMK general  council  from 
1961 to 1969.

Elected to the Tamil Nadu Assembly in 1962, he became the  Leader 
of  the Opposition. When the DMK was voted to power in  1967,  he 
was made number two in the Cabinet by Annadurai.

After  Annadurai's death in 1969, Nedunchezhiyan was  the  acting 
Chief  Minister for a brief while before Mr. M.  Karunanidhi  was 
sworn  in.  He  continued as the number two  in  the  Karunanidhi 
cabinet too (1969 to 1976).

However,  after the dismissal of the DMK government, he quit  the 
DMK and formed his own party, the Makkal DMK, along with  another 
senior DMK leader, Sathyavani Muthu. But, a year after the AIADMK 
came to power in 1977, he merged the Makkal DMK with the AIADMK.

In the MGR cabinet he served as the Finance Minister from 1980 to 
1987.  During  the period of MGR's  hospitalisation  in  1984-85, 
Nedunchezhiyan  presided over State Cabinet meetings.  After  MGR 
died in 1987, he was made the acting chief minister. He lost  out 
to  MGR's widow, Janaki Ramachandran, in the race for  the  chief 
ministership.

He  remained  in the Jayalalitha faction of the AIADMK  for  some 
time,  but  following  differences with the  leadership,  he  was 
expelled  in  August  in 1988. He  contested  the  1989  Assembly 
election as part of a Group of Four. However, he returned to  the 
unified AIADMK under Ms. Jayalalitha in October 1989.

From 1991 to 1996, he was the Finance Minister in the Jayalalitha 
government  holding, once again, the number two position  in  the 
Cabinet.  Despite  a split in the party in 1998,  he  remained  a 
Jayalalitha loyalist for the rest of his life.
