
A three-way battle emerging in Bihar


By Our Staff Correspondent

PATNA, JAN. 12. The oncoming Assembly Elections will prove to  be 
a keen battle of survival for three leaders, and not just one  as 
was  the case just three months ago in the Lok  Sabha  elections. 
The  emergence of two more serious claimants from the  Opposition 
camp  for the top job, the Rashtriya Janata Dal is  contemplating 
to project the former Chief Minister, Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav,  as 
the next Chief Minister.

The RJD think-tank has realised that it has to take on two  heavy 
weights in the Telecommunication Minister, Mr. Ram Vilas  Paswan, 
and  the  Union Agriculture Minister, Mr. Nitish  Kumar,  as  top 
contenders for the hot seat.

Even though the NDA has decided not to project any leader as  the 
prospective Chief Ministerial candidate, political observers feel 
that the mantle would rest on either of these two leaders, unless 
somebody else emerges as the dark horse, if the alliance were  to 
succeed in wresting power from the RJD.

In the RJD's appraisal it would not be quite judicious to take on 
the  principal  opposition combine by  projecting  the  incumbent 
Chief Minister, Mrs. Rabri Devi, as the next Chief Minister, even 
though Mr. Yadav would be in command of the party's campaign.

The  thinking  is Mrs. Rabri Devi's candidature  is  unlikely  to 
carry  the same weight with the electorate if the contenders  for 
the  Chief  Minister's post includes Mr. Paswan  and  Mr.  Nitish 
Kumar.  The RJD leaders seem to reckon that it would not be  easy 
to  convince  the voters of the party's seriousness to  rule  the 
State  if it were not to project Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav  as  next 
Chief Minister.

The top leaders of the RJD consider it imperative that Mr.  Laloo 
Yadav, the man with the largest following, should lead the  party 
from  the front. They think they have to resort to this  plan  as 
the  JD(U) president and the Civil Aviation Minister, Mr.  Sharad 
Yadav, has not revealed his mind.

The  RJD  leaders do not rule out the possibility of  Mr.  Sharad 
Yadav  favouring the former Union Minister, Mr.  Devandra  Prasad 
Yadav,  in  which case it would be essential to ensure  that  the 
Yadav  community as a whole remain united and solidly behind  the 
taller of the two Yadavs.

Although  the BJP has been making some noise it may not  find  it 
easy  to procure the top job for any of its aspirants as they  do 
not  match up to the stature of either Mr. Paswan or  Mr.  Nitish 
Kumar, nor enjoy the kind of following they command.

The RJD's calculation to project Mr. Laloo Yadav apparently stems 
from  the  fact  that the fight is limited  within  the  ``Mandal 
camp''  and  the  voters  had to  be  given  the  better  choice. 
Moreover, Mr. Yadav's stature is regarded as vital to cash in  on 
the tussle within the NDA for the top job.

The  RJD  proposes  to communicate that it is  united  under  its 
supermo while the BJP-led alliance was a divided facade.

The  ruling  party  is also aware that it would not  be  easy  to 
project  Mr. Laloo Yadav as the next Chief Minister  particularly 
because  Mrs.  Rabri  Devi happens to hold the  post.  Hence  the 
party's  strategy seems to be to subtly but  effectively  express 
its intentions to the electorate through its actions.

Mrs.  Rabri  Devi  did declare yesterday that she  would  not  be 
contesting the Assembly elections. It is a different matter  that 
she  happens to be a member of the Upper House,  which  qualifies 
her for the post if the party is returned to power for the  third 
successive time.

Perhaps  she  revealed that Mr. Yadav might contest  one  of  the 
Assembly  seats to tell the voters clearly that he would  be  the 
leader  of the legislature party. According to party  sources  he 
was likely to contest either from Raghopur constituency, which he 
represented  as Chief Minister till he became an MP, in 1998,  or 
from  Sonepur, which he had represented before. There are  offers 
from Bakhtiarpur and Maner constituencies as well.

Much  of the party's strategy would become clear after Mr.  Yadav 
decides  whether to contest the Assembly elections. He  has  thus 
far declined to comment either way.
