
195 model police stations proposed 


By Our Staff Reporter

CHENNAI,  JAN. 12. In an effort to boost the image of the  police 
and  bring them ``closer'' to the public, a total of  195  police 
stations in the State are being upgraded into ``model stations''.

At  least  one  police station  at  the  district/commissionerate 
headquarters  and one each at the sub-division headquarters  have 
been  converted  into  model stations, the  Director  General  of 
Police Mr. F. C. Sharma told media persons today.

The  police  personnel  for  manning  these  stations  have  been 
carefully  selected  to ensure complainants  were  treated  well. 
These  stations  have  been  provided  with  adequate  resources, 
manpower   and  technical  support.  Steps  will  be  taken   for 
increasing  the number of model police stations every  year,  Mr. 
Sharma said.

Claiming  that  there was a decline in the violent  and  property 
crimes  during 1999 when compared to the previous year,  he  said 
that  while 25,498 property offences were reported  during  1998, 
last year only 23,404 cases were reported. The detection rate was 
76 per cent for the last year while it was 73 per cent in 1998.

Though  the law and order situation as a whole in Tamil Nadu  was 
peaceful  the police could not afford to be complacent, he  said. 
When asked if the police had any information about ISI activities 
in the State the DGP replied in the negative. There were about 23 
Pakistani  nationals in Tamil Nadu and one of them  was  recently 
arrested   on  charges  of  ``over  staying''.  These   Pakistani 
nationals did not have links with any terrorist organisation,  he 
said.

In  connection with cases regarding financial  institutions,  the 
DGP  said  that the convictions awarded to a few persons  by  the 
special  court  under the Protection of Interests  of  Depositors 
(Financial Establishment) Act 1997 would serve as a deterrent  to 
erring financial companies.

A  total of 22 persons have been arrested after the shoot out  in 
which  one  person  was killed and in  connection  with  the  bus 
burning incidents at Dharampuri, the DGP said.

Priority  was  being given for tackling cases  of  crime  against 
women.  During  November  alone  a  total  of  5940  cases   were 
registered  for  various crimes against women of  which.  Out  of 
these  cases,  about  5500 were  detected  and  convictions  were 
awarded  to  1534  persons,  the ADGP  (law  and  order)  Mr.  S. 
Kumaraswamy said.

The  police had detained about 763 persons under the Goondas  Act  
in Chennai city alone, the additional commissioner of police  Mr. 
M. Balachandran said.

The  IG (law and order) Mr. Subbiah said the police will step  up 
patrolling for preventing crime incidents.
