
6 convicted in car bomb blast case


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  12. Six of the 14 accused  in  the  sensational 
Jubilee Hills car bomb blast case in Hyderabad two years ago were 
convicted   by   the   Special   Court   Judge,   Mr.   Samudrala 
Govindarajulu, here, on Wednesday.

Gangula Suryanarayana Reddy alias Suri, Varikoti Prabhakar Reddy, 
Kultoori Vasudeva Reddy, Ramasani Anand Reddy, Moreddygari  Laxmi 
Reddy  and S. Pavan Kumar were convicted under Section 120  B  of 
Indian  Penal Code (IPC) and sentenced each to undergo  14  years 
rigorous imprisonment (RI) and pay a fine of Rs. 5,000.

In  the ghastly blast on November 19, 1997, 25 innocent  persons, 
including the crew of Eeenadu TV, lost their lives. The car  bomb 
blast  was close to Rama Naidu's studio in Jubilee  Hills,  where 
the  `muhurat' function of ``Sriramulaiah'' was held. The  former 
Minister, Mr. Paritala Ravindra, was the producer of the film and 
the bomb was intended at him. He had escaped with minor injuries. 
Twenty others were injured.

The  case  was  investigated  by  a  CID  team  led  by  Mr.   K. 
Subrahmanyam and the accused were arrested within a month of  the 
blast  from  various  places,  including  Bangalore.  The   State 
Government  constituted  a Special Court on October 1,  1998,  to 
exclusively  try this case and the trial commenced  amidst  tight 
security on December 7, 1998. The trial concluded in just over  a 
year, after examining a number of witnesses cited from  different 
parts of the State, Karnataka, Goa, Kerala and Maharashtra.

Pavan  Kumar, an engineering student and resident  of  Bangalore, 
who operated remote device detonating the car bomb, was convicted 
to  life  imprisonment under Section 302 IPC and a  fine  of  Rs. 
2,000 on 25 counts. 

The  eight  acquitted were Nagireddygari Dasi Reddy,  S.  Bhaskar 
Reddy,  Kummari  Nagaraju, Bujjula  Venkata  Padmananabha  Reddy, 
Thopudurthi Prakash Reddy, T. Chandrasekahara Reddy,  Tagarakunta 
Sivaprasada Reddy and Ramireddy Narsimha Reddy.
