
Naxalite killing: HC orders re-post-mortem


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN.  12.  The Madras High  Court  today  directed  the 
Dharmapuri  district  Collector and  Revenue  Divisional  Officer 
(RDO)  to conduct a re-post mortem on the body of Ravindran,  who 
was  allegedly  shot dead ``in an encounter  with  police''  near 
Dharmapuri two days ago.

Passing  orders  on  a petition filed by  Ravindran's  wife,  Ms. 
Nirmala,  a Law lecturer in Vizag University, Mr. Justice  P.  D. 
Dinakaran  said  the  re-post  mortem  should  be  conducted   in 
Government  General  Hospital, Chennai, in the  presence  of  the 
Director  of  Forensic  Sciences  Laboratory,  Chennai,  at   the 
earliest possible time. 

However,  the  post mortem report should be  kept  in  confidence 
until further orders of the Court, the Judge said and posted  the 
matter on January 24.

Ms. Nirmala's petition contended that Ravindran had resigned  his 
post as Engineer in the Telecom department, to work for the cause 
of farm labourers of Dharmapuri. 

He  had taken up human rights issues. He exposed the murder of  a 
student  by  a  Police inspector of Dharmapuri.  Because  of  his 
activities,   he  incurred  the  wrath  of  the   local   police, 
particularly `Q' Branch police.

She submitted that Ravindran was taken into custody on January 7, 
and was beaten up and tortured to extract confession to implicate 
him in several criminal cases. He was taken to Perunkadu, a  hill 
station near Palacode, where he was ``done to death''. 

It  was  a  cold-blooded murder by policemen.  No  procedure  was 
followed and he was not produced before any court after 24 hours. 
Hence, his detention was illegal, it added.

To screen the offence, the police were taking steps to dispose of 
Ravindran's body without her knowledge, Ms. Nirmala said. The so-
called   post-mortem  was  not  conducted  in  the  presence   of 
independent persons; no video was taken to note down the physical 
injuries. 

It  was necessary to conduct the post mortem in the  presence  of 
lawyers  and doctors of her choice, who could lend  assurance  to 
her that the inquest was done fairly, Ms. Nirmala said.

On January 10, the Dharmapuri police stated that Ravindran, as  a 
member  of  the banned People's War Group, was  involved  in  the 
burning  of  a  bus  near Hoggenakal  earlier  this  month.  Four 
suspects  including the deceased and another activist Shiva,  who  
were  arrested,  tried to flee after attacking  the  police.  The 
police  party opened fire on them leading to  Ravindran's  death, 
the police said. Shiva was arrested.
