
Security rings around monastery


By Sujay Mehdudia

SIDHBARI,  (H.P.), JAN. 12. The Gyuto Ramoche  Tantrik  Monastery 
here,  which was buzzing with activity only three days  ago,  now 
presents the picture of a fortress as it has been declared  ``out 
of  bounds'' for the Tibetan people and other visitors.  This  is 
the  place where the `living Buddha' Ogyan Trinley  Dorjee,  17th 
Karmapa, has been housed under protection since Sunday morning. 

Although there is no official `confirmation' as to where  exactly 
the ``Golden Child'' has been kept, it is clear that the  Karmapa 
is recuperating at this still incomplete monastery, located about 
8 km from Dharamsala on the Dharamsala- Palampur Road. 

A visit to the monastery by this reporter not only confirmed  the 
presence of the Karmapa but also gave an insight into the kind of 
security  provided  to him in view of the serious threat  to  his 
life. After climbing uphill to the footsteps of the monastry, one 
is  greeted  by  the  sign  `closed.'  Along  the  steps  of  the 
monastery, Tibetan security officials stand guard to prevent  any 
unwanted person from gaining entry into the monastery. 

Similarly, trained German shepards have been deployed around  the 
monastery to prevent entry of foreign elements. The first ring of 
security  consists of Tibetans. Under strict instructions not  to 
allow anyone inside, their duty is to frisk unwanted people.  The 
local Tibetans have been told not to visit the monastery as  ``it 
is  still  under  construction''. Some senior  officials  of  the 
Kashag  (Tibetan Cabinet) are the only ones apart from  officials 
from the State Government and Intelligence Bureau who are allowed 
to go inside. 

The  second  ring  of security comprises armed  guards  from  the 
Himachal  Pradesh  police.  They keep a  check  on  all  incoming 
visitors and are armed with automatic rifles and SLRs. They stand 
guard at the side gates of the monastery which has now been  made 
the  main  entrance. Standing behind closed  glass  doors,  these 
armed guards look at everyone with suspicion. 

Similarly,  assisting them at the side entrance are  the  Tibetan 
officials  and  plain-clothesmen  of the  CID.  Metal  detectors, 
walkie-talkies  and other electronic gadgets have been  installed 
to check all visitors. A register is being maintained of the  VIP 
visitors  and maps of the entire area have been laid out  on  the 
table. 

This reporter managed to sneak in and have an inside view of  the 
monastery.  One could see another ring of Intelligence  officials 
keeping  an  eye inside the various rooms of the  monastery  with 
electronic  gadgets and walkie-talkies in their hands. Nobody  is 
willing  to confirm the presence of the Karmapa in  the  Sidhbari  
monastry. 

However,  construction labourers around the  monastery  indicated 
that only since the past three days people have been asked not to 
come  to  the monastery. Even the labourers who had  free  access 
have been told to keep off. All the labourers are frisked in  the 
morning and a strict vigil is kept on them and their movements. 

The Karmapa is learnt to be reading scriptures most of the  time. 
He  is  said  to be in fine health and  doctors  of  the  Tibetan 
Government-in-exile   are   understood  to  have   conducted   an 
examination  of the Karmapa. As of now, his diet consists  mainly 
of   fruits   and   cereals.  Some  senior   officials   of   the 
Government-in-exile  met him today. Also staying with him is  his 
24-year-old sister, his attendant, two more monks who accompanied 
him from China and his two body guards. 

The State SSP, Mr. K. C. Sadyal, told The Hindu that security had 
been  beefed  up for the Karmapa. It appears that  more  security 
personnel  were  deputed last night after the assessment  of  the 
security threat was made by officials of the Tibetan  Government-
in-exile and the State police. 
