
Cancer detection scheme for poor inaugurated


By Our Staff Reporter

PONDICHERRY,  JAN. 12. The Lieutenant Governor, Dr.  Rajani  Rai, 
has  underscored the need for making the services of  specialists 
available to people in rural areas for better health.

Inaugurating the ``Health for all'' scheme and also launching the 
Cancer  Detection  Centre's vehicle at Mannadipet  near  here  on 
Wednesday, Dr. Rai said unless medical services were available to 
the  majority  of  the rural people  progress  in  general  macro 
parameters would not be meaningful.

The  cost of medical treatment had increased considerably  adding 
to  the  difficulties  of rural people  in  accessing  speciality 
medical care. Both private hospitals in rural areas and the well-
equipped urban hospitals were out of reach for them, she said.

Taking  this into consideration the Administration  had  launched 
the  new scheme to address the health requirements of  people  in 
the  villages.  Mobile dispensaries  with  laboratory  facilities 
would be sent out every Friday to cover all the villages.

The  Lieutenant  Governor said villagers were ignorant  of  early 
symptoms  of  cancer and such negligence would  lead  to  chronic 
ailment. The introduction of the mobile unit for early  detection 
of cancer would be of help.

Dr.  Rai,  who  also  launched  the  Pondicherry  Medical  Relief 
Assistance,  said Rs. 1.5 lakhs would be sanctioned  to  patients 
with chronic diseases. Poor people would be able to get  advanced 
medical treatment in recognised private hospitals in neighbouring 
states.

The  Chief Minister, Mr. R. V. Janakiraman, said  the  facilities 
for the villagers in health sector had been developed during  the 
present  rule. He said what could not be considered in  the  past 
had  been  realised  and  the poor couldnow  look  forward  to  a 
healthier life.

The  Health  Minister,  Mr. A. M. H. Nazeem,  said  the  improved 
medical  and  health  care  facilities  in  Union  Territory   of 
Pondicherry had ensured increase in life expectancy to 68 years.

Specialists in the field of gynaecology, ENT and dentistry  would 
form the medical team. 

Mr.  Nazeem  said  regular health camps  would  be  conducted  in 
various rural areas and also at urban centres in a phased manner.

The Director of Health and Family Welfare Services, Dr. D. Thamma 
Rao,  read  out  a report  highlighting  the  pioneering  schemes  
introduced by the department.

The Health Secretary, Mr. B. Vijayan, welcomed those present. The 
Deputy  Director  (General  Health),  Dr.  V.  P.  Keerthiseelan, 
proposed a vote of thanks.
