
Govt. appoints panel on creamy layer


By Our Special Correspondent

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, JAN. 12. The Kerala Cabinet has appointed the 
former judge of the Kerala High Court, Mr. K. K. Narendran, as  a 
one-man  Commission  to suggest fresh  criteria  for  identifying 
`creamy layer' among backward communities in the State. He  would 
also head a three-member Commission to assess the  representation 
that each community has in the State Government service.

The Narendran Commission on `creamy layer', appointed to  provide 
`maximum  benefits  permissible  within  the  parameters  of  the 
December 13 Supreme Court verdict to backward communities', would 
have to submit its recommendations within a month. The Commission 
has  been  asked to suggest fresh criteria  for  determining  the 
`creamy  layer'  among  backward communities  in  tune  with  the 
Supreme  Court directives and advise the Government  whether  any 
community could be excluded from the `creamy layer' on the  basis 
of their traditional vocations or some other criteria.

It has been told to see if any separate criteria was necessary to 
assess  the income and assets of different sections  figuring  in 
the  `creamy  layer'  and if so, what should be  the  ceiling  on 
income  and assets and also whether any particular income  should 
be  excluded  from  calculations. The Government  has  asked  the 
Commission to take the present social and economic status of  the 
backward  communities in Kerala in general while  finalising  its 
recommendations.

Briefing  reporters  after the Cabinet meeting  here  today,  the 
Chief  Minister  said the three-member panel  for  assessing  the 
caste-wise  composition of employees in State Government  service 
and public sector units would be given six months' time to submit 
its report. The two other members of the panel would be named  by 
the Cabinet at its next meeting, he said.

The Finance Minister, Mr. T. Sivadasa Menon, said the Cabinet had 
also  decided  to move a resolution in the next  session  of  the 
State  Assembly  seeking  a  Constitution  amendment  to   extend 
reservation  benefits  to  the disadvantaged  among  the  forward 
communities  and to ensure that the `creamy layer' norm  did  not 
result in jobs reserved for backward communities falling into the 
general pool.

The Law Minister, Mr. E. Chandrasekharan Nair, said the  validity 
of PSC ranklists would be extended to ensure that the recruitment 
freeze in force in the State now did not result in the denial  of 
employment opportunities to anyone.

The Chief Minister announced additional ex gratia of Rs. 15 lakhs 
to  those who had sustained loss of property in post-December  12 
violence in different parts of Kannur. The Government had earlier  
announced  an ex gratia of Rs. 19.97 lakhs to  compensate  losses 
suffered  by  people in these localities from December 1  to  12, 
1999. The additional assistance has been announced in response to 
a plea made by the all-party meeting held in Kannur on January 6.

Mr. Nayanar said a decision had been taken to provide  assistance 
to  those  who had suffered losses in the area after  August  25, 
1999.  The  District Collector would assess the  actual  property 
loss  and  the Government would decide on the  exact  quantum  of 
assistance after deducting insurance claims, if any.  Allegations 
that  there  was  political discrimination in  the  provision  of 
assistance had no factual basis. If any eligible person has  been 
denied  relief, he or she could make a request in writing to  the 
District Collector or the Government for assistance.

The  Chief Minister said the Government had taken  impartial  and 
stringent  measures  to ensure peace in the area.  All  political 
parties  had  cooperated with the Government in this  and,  as  a 
result,  normality  was  slowly  returning  to  the  violence-hit 
localities.  Everybody  should try to avoid  raising  allegations 
which  could  harm such efforts. Complaints, if  any,  should  be 
brought to the notice of the Government, Mr. Nayanar added.

The  Chief Minister said the Cabinet had decided to allow  owners 
of shops and establishments in the busy Broadway shopping area in 
Kochi, gutted in a major fire on January 7, to reconstruct  their 
buildings  with  the same measurements. Those  without  insurance 
cover  would be given financial assistance. The fire tenders  and 
police personnel who had helped put down the fire would be  given 
Good Service Entry.

Similarly,  those who had suffered losses in the recent  fire  in 
Kollam  would  be given assistance on the basis of  the  District 
Collector's  report. Mr. K. V. Rajesh, who had been maimed  in  a 
mine blast while participating in `Operation Vijay' in Jammu  and 
Kashmir  would  be  given Rs. 1 lakh from  the  Chief  Minister's 
Relief Fund.

The Kerala Tourism Development Corporation (KTDC) would be  given 
the  title deed for the eight-acre plot in which its  Tea  County 
Resort is located. The State Trading Corporation (STC) would from 
now on be exempt from paying purchase tax on natural rubber.
