
Free run for sugar cooperatives in Maharashtra


By Mahesh Vijapurkar

MUMBAI,  JAN. 12. When the sugar barons of  Maharashtra  gathered 
for  their  annual  fest here, there were smiles  on  almost  all 
faces,  indicative  of  the  good  times  ahead  because  ``their 
Government,  controlled  by  them  and  for  them''  is  back  in 
business.

After  a  gap of five years, the Chief Minister, -  Mr.  Vilasrao 
Deshmukh - was back with them, to articulate the usual cautionary 
words  for  ``clean  cooperatives''. For  the  last  five  years, 
neither Mr. Manohar Joshi nor Mr. Narayan Rane, both of the  Shiv 
Sena attended their meetings.

Mr. Deshmukh said that the sugar barons managed ``power  houses'' 
and  ``power centres'' in the countryside. ``Half my Cabinet  run 
sugar cooperatives, how can we go against you?'' he said.

Mr. Deshmukh's appearance caused a mild but positive flutter. The 
NCP  leader,  Mr. Sharad Pawar followed him in and  was  received 
well  by the audience indicative of how, despite  divisions,  the 
lobby's  tilt was in favour of the NCP leader. As one baron  told 
TheHindu: ``This is because of his personality and involvement in 
the sector.''

Mr.  Ram Meghe, newly elected chief of the lobby today  told  Mr. 
Deshmukh,  ``Now that the Congress Government was back,  critical 
proposals  for the sugar cooperative sector would be passed  more 
easily.''  But the flip side is that Mr. Jayant  Patil,  outgoing 
lobby chief, now a Finance Minister, would perhaps be hard put to 
take decisions to meet his earlier demands.

Mr.  Pawar, who is considered the power behind  the  Congress(I)- 
NCP  Government  here,  had been attending  most  of  the  annual 
general  meetings  of  the  sugar  federation,  either  as  Chief 
Minister  as in 1978, or later as a key political  figure,  Union 
Minister or later again as Chief Minister.

Almost  every  politician with a sugar industry  connection,  was 
there, proclaiming that the Government and the sector would  work 
in concert for the good of the industry. The Government, said the 
Chief Minister, should interfere the least.
