
7 years RI for former AIADMK MLA in wealth case


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI, JAN. 12. The former AIADMK MLA from Bhuvanagiri, Ms.  G. 
Malliga,  was today convicted under the Prevention of  Corruption 
Act  and  sentenced  to the maximum  punishment  of  seven  years 
rigorous  imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs. one lakh  in  the 
`disproportionate wealth case' against her. She paid the fine.

Her brother, Mr. G. Selvaraj, and his wife, Ms. Manimekalai,  who 
were also cited as accused in the case, were found guilty of  the 
charge against them. As they were not present in the court today, 
the Judge split up the case and issued a non- bailable warrant of 
arrest  against  them for their production in  the  court.  Their 
applications to dispense with their presence was dismissed by the 
Judge. 

The  charge against the accused was that Ms. Malliga, as an  MLA, 
had  abused her official position and accumulated wealth  in  her 
name and in the names of Mr. Selvaraj and his wife to the tune of 
Rs.  2,36,15,386. Hence she was punishable under PCA sections  13 
(2)  read  with  13 (1) (e). As regards the  other  two  accused, 
besides the PCA sections, they were charged with IPC section  109 
(abetment) 

This is the second case in which judgement has been delivered  by 
the   Special   Court-I,  the  earlier  one   being   a   similar 
`disproportionate   wealth  case'  against  the   former   AIADMK 
Minister, Mr. Nagoor Meeran.

The Special Judge-I, Mr. S. Sambandham, who dictated the  80-page 
judgement in the open court, said the prosecution had proved  the 
guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. 

On the basis of the material placed before the court, the quantum 
of ill-gotten wealth was fixed by the Judge at Rs. 2,35,34,338.

On a memo filed by the accused that adequate opportunity had  not 
been given to them to examine their witnesses, the Judge strongly 
criticised  the  defendants. Before pronouncing  the  order,  the 
Judge  asked  Ms. Malliga as to what she had to say. In  a  voice 
choked  with emotion, she replied, the crime had  been  committed 
without  her  knowledge.  If  the  court  decided  that  she  had 
accumulated  wealth  disproportionate  to her  known  sources  of 
income, the government could take over the properties and she may 
be acquitted.

After  Ms. Malliga's reply, the Judge said whenever the case  was 
to  come  up,  he was mentally tortured. There was  a  limit  for 
advocates.  ``Can  any remark be passed against a Judge.  Do  you 
think  you  can  go  on  talking  daily?'',  he  asked.  She  was 
instrumental  in making a mockery of the judicial proceedings  in  
the  case.  In his order on the memo, the Judge said ``In  my  29 
years  of experience in no other similar case had  such  wounding 
remarks been made against me''. 

``I feel relieved now'', he said after delivering the  judgement. 
``Frankly  speaking on the nights preceding the dates of  hearing 
of the case, I was pained to such an extent as to wonder  whether 
the  day should dawn at all''. In this case, remarks which  would 
wound him had been made in the open court, he regretted.

Referring  to  the  submission  that  the  accused  had  acquired 
properties  by borrowing money and through the income from  prawn 
farm,  the Judge said their contention that lakhs of  rupees  had 
been  obtained as income in eight months from a prawn farm  which 
had  no  electricity  connection was not  acceptable.  Also,  the 
accused  did  not give details as to why one Mr.  Chinnaiah  Bose 
credited  to  their bank accounts huge sums of money  in  foreign 
exchange. 

The pronotes said to have been given by Ms. Malliga were found to 
have been ``written on a single day, all by the same person using 
the  same pen''. Further, the prosecution had submitted  evidence 
to show that on the dates the loans had been obtained against the 
pronotes,  Ms.  Malliga was in Chennai and  had  participated  in 
Legislative Assembly proceedings.

Ms.  Malliga  was  taken to Vellore to be lodged  in  the  prison 
there.
