
Special drive against cow slaughter in Gujarat


By Our Special Correspondent 

GANDHINAGAR,  JAN. 12. The BJP Government in Gujarat has  decided 
to  launch  an intensive, two-month special drive  to  check  cow 
slaughter in the State from January 15. 

Announcing  this,  the  Minister of State  for  Home,  Mr.  Haren 
Pandya,  said  the  anti-cow  slaughter  drive,  particularly  to 
unearth  illegal slaughter houses flourishing in the  State,  was 
part  of police action plan drawn a few months ago to  check  the 
crime rate in the State. 

The Government's decision comes close on the heels of the  three-
day  State-level ``sankalp shibir'' of the Rashtriya  Swayamsevak 
Sangh (RSS) in which the underlying theme was a campaign for  the 
protection  of  the  cow and its  progenies.  At  the  concluding 
ceremony of the camp on Sunday, the RSS chief, Mr.Rajendrasinghji 
(Rajju  Bhaiya), had even indirectly blamed the inaction  of  the 
Central  and the State Governments to protect the  cow  progenies 
from the thriving, illegal slaughter houses. ``Thousands of  cows 
are still being illegally slaughtered in the country only to feed 
the  people in the Arabian countries,'' he had said.  Mr.  Pandya 
said the Government was also thinking of invoking the  provisions 
of  the Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act (PASA) to  check 
cow  slaughter and make amendments in the Cow Protection  Act  to 
make  it more stringent and deterrent. In the last eight  months, 
446 cases of illegal cow slaughter has been registered in various 
parts of the State and 6.747 illegal slaughtering prevented. 

The drive would be jointly launched by police, the Directorate of 
Animal  Husbandry,  the  Regional  Transport  Authority  and  the 
municipal  corporations  and panchayats concerned,  with  support 
from  the non-Government animal welfare organisations. The  drive 
would also include checking of illegal transportation of cows and 
their  progenies  through rail and road  transports  outside  the 
State. 

Mr.   Pandya  said  a  permanent  structure  would   be   created 
incorporating  all the agencies concerned for the  protection  of 
cow  progeny.  The Additional Chief Secretary (Home), Dr.  V.  V. 
Rama Subba Rao, said the Government was studying whether the non- 
cognisable  offences  relating  to  animal  slaughter  could   be 
converted into a cognisable offence, particularly in relation  to 
cow slaughter. Attempts to check the illegal slaughter of cows by 
the  Sangh  Parivar volunteers had in the  past  evoked  communal 
riots in the State. 
