
Three dacoits shot dead


By Our Staff Reporter

MEDCHAL, JAN. 12. Three dacoits, who raped three farm  labourers, 
killed  one person and looted their houses in Somaram village  in 
Ranga  Reddy  district in November last, were shot  dead  by  the 
Medchal  police on Wednesday while they were allegedly trying  to 
escape  after  attacking  policemen. A  Sub-Inspector  of  Police 
sustained a knife cut on his hand in the attack.

The  police  at about 11 a.m. took Turpaati Ramulu (26)  and  his 
brothers  -  T.  Narsimha (30) and T. Mallesh  (19)  -  to  Shiva 
Farmhouse at Somaram village in Medchal mandal to reconstruct the 
scene  of crime. And even as the police were taking  them  around 
the  farmhouse the trio made a vain bid to attack the police  and 
escape.  One of them snatched a rifle and fired two rounds  while 
the other two grabbed kitchen knives and lunged at the police.

``The  police  brought  them (dacoits) to  the  farmhouse.  After 
coming  out of the second room, we saw Ramulu snatching  a  rifle 
from  one of the constables while Narsimha and  Mallesh  attacked 
the police with knives which they had managed to pick up from the 
room'',  recalled  a horrified labourer of  Shiva  Farmhouse,  V. 
Varalakshmi.  Her brother, Suryanarayanaraju, was killed by  them 
on  November 27 when he tried to prevent the dacoits from  raping 
his wife.

``Ramulu had snatched.303 rifle from constable, Ravinder  Reddy, 
and  fired  twice while Mallesh and Narsimha  attacked  the  Sub-
Inspector,  Narayana, and he suffered a cut on his left  forearm. 
On  seeing  them  go berserk I ordered fire'', said  Mr.  D.  Ram 
Reddy, Circle Inspector of Medchal police station.

On  receiving  order to open fire, constable Devender  fired  two 
rounds  each  at Mallesh and Narsimha  while  another  constable, 
Shanker, fired three rounds at Ramulu. They were hit on the chest 
and back regions and collapsed on the spot. 

The  bodies  were lying in pool of blood right in  front  of  the 
Shiva Farmhouse where they had killed Suryanarayanaraju and raped 
his  wife.  Ramulu's body was lying with its face to  the  ground 
while a.303 rifle was seen lying under his left hand and next to 
him  were the bodies of Mallesh and Narsimha. Three more  members 
of  the gang - T. Lachaiah, Parvatam Narsimhlu and T. Narayana  - 
were  yet to be nabbed. All of them hailed from Gajwel  in  Medak 
district.

``On  the  fateful night I pleaded with them not to harm  us.  My 
son-in-law gave them Rs. 2,000. Myself, my daughter, Varalakshmi, 
and daughter-in-law, Padma, gave them our `mangalasutrams',  nose 
and  ear-studs.  They  also  collected  three  pairs  of  clothes 
belonging to my son-in-law, Venkataraju,'' a sobbing  Suryakantam  
said.

Later,   at   a  press  conference  the  Ranga   Reddy   district 
Superintendent of Police, Mr. N. V. Surendra Babu, announced cash 
rewards to the entire team of the Medchal police.
