
Antiques, antler pieces seized


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN.  12. The officials of the Directorate  of  Revenue 
Intelligence (DRI), Chennai unit, today seized deer horn  antlers 
and  sandalwood  valued  at Rs.65 lakhs  and  also  ``priceless'' 
antique  brass  metals  before they were being  smuggled  out  of 
Chennai. 

The Additional Director General of DRI, Mr.P.N. Vittal Dass, told 
mediapersons  that  the central  investigative  agency  officials 
intercepted a container lying at Chennai docks with the documents 
showing 600 bags of rice bound for Singapore. 

The container was found with only 50 bags of rice and the rest of 
the cargo was sandalwood logs weighing 7 tonnes and sawn  antlers 
of deer species. 

``We have arrested three persons in this connection, including  a 
manager  of  a  Chennai-based  export  company  and  two  persons 
involved  in transporting the consignment which was meant  to  be 
shipped  to  Singapore'', Mr.Dass said and added that  the  ``DRI 
strongly  suspects a gang operation and our detailed probe  would 
throw  more  light on their possible national  and  international 
links''.

Detailing about the seizures of antiques, claimed to be over  400 
to 500 years old, Mr.Dass said the officials recovered 19 numbers 
of  fibre-wall hangings, 6 brass metal lamps, 1 hanging  lamp,  1 
metal vessel and 3 metallic elephant heads. 

Some  of  the items appeared to be antique  and  accordingly  the 
Archaeological  Survey  of  India  was  contacted  for   detailed 
examination of the goods.

The  Expert Advisory Committee of ASI certified the  vessel,  the 
hanging  lamp  with  Lord Vinayaka and the 3  elephant  heads  as 
antiquities.   Mr.Dass  said  the  Commissioner  of  Museum   had 
requested  the  DRI  to handover the antiquities  to  the  Museum 
Department  for posterity. Pointing out that the coastal  stretch 
of  Tuticorin  has been declared ``sensitive''  of  smuggling  of 
narcotics,  Mr.  Dass said that all  the  investigative  agencies 
including the DRI have geared up their machinery. 

The  DRI,  he  noted, was  particularly  concentrating  on  anti-
smuggling  activities  relating to  gold,  narcotics,  electronic 
goods,  foreign  currency, besides snake  skins,  sandalwood  and 
other forest products. 

Pieces  of  deer  horn  seized by DRI  officials  in  Chennai  on 
Wednesday.
