
'Uniform ST will help industrial growth in Pondy'


By Our Staff Reporter

PONDICHERRY,  JAN.12.  The  general  secretary  of  newly  formed 
Pudhuvai Maanila Vanniyar Munnetra Kazhagam, Mr. G.  Tiruvarasan, 
said here today that his organisation was a non-political one and 
it  would  champion the cause of the backward and  most  backward 
classes in the Union Territory. 

Welcoming  the adoption of uniform sales tax in all  States,  Mr. 
Tiruvarasan  told a press conference here that implementation  of 
the  uniform sales tax would encourage the industrial  growth  in 
Pondicherry. 

He  said those setting up new industries in the  Union  Territory 
were   simply  grabbing  the  farm  lands  and   changing   their 
nomenclatures often just to utilise the tax concessions and  also 
get exemption from other levies. 

The Kazhagam would hold a state-level conference on March 2 where 
the flag of the kazhagam would be finalised. Youth camps would be 
conducted in all the constituencies so that the local youth could 
be  apprised  of  the benefits of uniform  sales  tax.  Presently 
workforce  was dumped from other pockets to the detriment of  the 
locally educated youth, he said.

Mr.  Tiruvarasan said his outfit would associate itself with  any 
forum  championing  the uniform sales tax. The main  reason  that 
prompted  him and other office bearers to float the kazhagam  for 
the  welfare of the backward classes was that all  along  nothing 
had  been  done  for the wellbeing of  the  Backward  classes  in 
Pondicherry  under the leadership of Dr. S. Ramadoss, founder  of 
the PMK, he said.

He said Dr. Ramadoss was taking decisions unilaterally and  there 
was  no inner party democracy in the PMK. He said in  the  recent 
Lok  Sabha  elections, Dr. Ramadoss fielded a candidate  who  was 
virtually not known to the partymen, and this was the main reason 
for the debacle of PMK. 

When the PMK was launched by Dr Ramadoss, Mr. Tiruvarasan said he 
had  put in his hard work and despite defeats in three  elections 
to  the territorial Assembly he had remained with the  party  and 
followed its principles. But when the candidate for the last  Lok 
Sabha  poll  was finalised, the PMK leader did not  consider  the 
seniority of workers in the party. 

Mr.Tiruvarasan alleged that Dr. Ramadoss seemed to be  interested 
only  in the welfare of his own relatives. Dissatisfied with  the 
functioning  of the leader, he said he had quit from the  primary 
membership of PMK in Pondicherry and sent his resignation  letter 
to Dr. Ramadoss. 

Mr. K. M. Krishnamoorthy, treasurer of the organisation, said the 
March  2  conference of the unit would attract  participation  of 
leaders of different political parties.
