
DIC to get ISO 9002 tag


By K. Satyamurty

BANGALORE,  JAN. 12. The Department of Industries  and  Commerce, 
Karnataka,  will get the coveted ISO 9002 certification  by  mid-
February.  It may well be the first Government department in  the 
country to get the certificate which requires stringent  quality, 
efficiency and productivity standards.

In  an  exclusive  interview  with  TheHindu,  Mr.   V.P.Baligar, 
Commissioner for Industrial Development and Director,  Industries 
and Commerce, said the ISO had just completed the  pre-assessment 
audit in this regard.

The  department  had  to  meet  criteria  like  a  timeframe  for 
operations,  training and motivation programmes for the staff,  a 
system  for evaluation, a performance target and a staff  manual, 
Mr.  Baligar said. During the past one year, he  had  streamlined 
the  process  of  `clearances'  for  industries  with   important 
certificates  issued within a few days and in the case  of  SSIs, 
subsidies sanctioned within one month. Paperwork was  drastically 
reduced.

Motivating  the staff of a government department to come  out  of 
their legacy of apathy and red-tapism was a task he was happy  to 
have  accomplished. This took training and motivational  meetings 
at all levels. For the Class IV staff it was the first time  they 
were  participating in a departmental meeting. He impressed  upon 
them  that even a small task like moving files from one table  to 
another was important and this helped build up their self-esteem.

In  letters sent to industrialists, Mr. Baligar stressed that  he 
would  be personally responsible for any delays and  appealed  to 
them  not  to resort to bribing to get their work  done;  neither 
need  they  hesitate to complain if  there  were  irregularities. 
``The officers and staff know I mean business,'' he remarked.

The  departmental  staff were made to understand that  delays  in 
clearances could mean huge losses each day for a small-scale unit 
which was paying heavy interest on its borrowings from banks. The 
employees  were  also persuaded to have a single  association  to 
represent them instead of a number of unions.

To  help  industrialists,  district-level cells  similar  to  the 
`Udyog  Mitra'  were  created,  which  helped  new  units  obtain 
clearances  from various departments. Industrial  `adalats'  were 
held each month in a district and 12 districts were covered  last 
year,  he  said.  These  helped  in  assessing  the  most  common 
complaints  of  industries  which ranged  from  power  supply  to 
problems  with the Pollution Control Board and delays in  getting 
the  subsidies  for  SSIs. To a great extent,  these  were  being 
remedied. 

With  regard to industrial growth in Karnataka, Mr.  Baligar  was 
optimistic that the scene was improving in tune with the  general 
turnaround in the economy. The Chief Minister, Mr. S. M. Krishna, 
had asked for an industrial growth rate of 10 per cent this  year 
and this could be achieved.

During  1997-98, investments of Rs. 968 crores were  approved  in 
the  state,  while  it went up to Rs.  1,800  crore  in  1998-99. 
Investments  of Rs. 1,500 crores had been cleared  between  April 
and  December-end  1999.  This  showed  that  Karnataka  had   an 
industry-friendly environment.

The  department  had  selected food processing  industries  as  a 
thrust area for development in the State, Mr. Baligar said. These 
could  promote  rural  employment on  a  large  scale.  Precision 
engineering and non IT-electronics were other sectors being given 
special  attention.  Some of the pharmaceutical majors  had  also 
showed interest in setting up units in Karnataka.

There  were active plans to promote a chemical  industries  zone, 
probably near Karwar on the coast, and for a new export promotion 
zone  near Mangalore. These would also help Karnataka  achieve  a 
high industrial growth.
