
Europe's corruption scandals


WESTERN LEADERS WHO ceaselessly lecture developing nations on the 
unacknowledged  advantages  of corruption-free,  good  governance 
must,  it  seems,  turn the mirror inward.  A  recent  series  of 
embarrassing disclosures of corruption in high places in  Western 
Europe, touching many of the leading lights, has shaken the well-
entrenched  establishments  in  these  countries.  The  rash   of 
scandals  has  been met by the launching  of  enquiries,  raising 
questions about possible faultlines in the time-tested  political 
system.  In the summer, allegations against some party  officials 
in  Britain, including a few holding important positions,  forced 
them to acknowledge possible misdeeds and malfeasance. The latest 
to  suffer  is  the high profile  former  German  Chancellor  and 
architect  of German unity, Mr. Helmut Kohl.  Europe's  superstar 
has admitted taking illicit cash donations and operating a system 
of secret slush funds during his long years at the helm and faces 
a criminal investigation that can result in imprisonment for five 
years and a hefty fine. Mr. Kohl initially denied any wrongdoing, 
stating  only  that  the funds he received did  not  benefit  him 
personally and had gone into the coffers of his ruling party, the 
Christian  Democratic Union. Later he declined to cooperate  with 
any  enquiry  that  may need him to reveal the  identity  of  the 
donors who had sworn him to secrecy. The decision to press  ahead 
with  the  enquiry deals a major blow to a  country  that  prides 
itself on total transparency in its public life. 

The  Kohl  enquiry has provoked a widespread  debate  in  Western 
Europe over the extent of such political corruption that cuts  at 
the  very root of democracy. Scandals at the headquarters of  the 
European  Union,  in France, Spain, Belgium, Germany,  Italy  and 
across  the Channel point to a deeper malaise in the system.  The 
Nineties have as a matter of fact seen the fall from the pedestal 
of  several politicians and bureaucrats following the  uncovering 
of scandals. The political quakes began in Spain where the ruling 
Socialist  party lost power over the issue of  corruption.  After 
last  summer's  campaign  funding allegations  against  the  U.S.  
President   and   the  trial  of   ex-Ministers   and   connected 
resignations  in Brussels came the scandal in France in  November 
that saw the exit of the Finance Minister, Mr. Dominique Strauss-
Kahn.  His  resignation followed an investigation  into  payments 
from a leftwing students' insurance fund before the elections  in 
1997.  In  almost  all instances, including  that  involving  the 
German  statesman,  the funds have gone primarily  to  the  party 
rather than to individuals, possibly indicating where the  system 
has rotted.

A  population  that  is  more  and  more  disenchanted  with  the 
political  leadership,  an electorate that has  become  apathetic 
and, of even greater relevance, a dwindling party membership have 
all   contributed   to  the  situation.   Funds   for   political 
organisation  and  for contesting elections have dried up  to  an 
alarming level, driving parties to outside sources that prefer to 
keep  their identity untainted by political contact. Attempts  to 
keep party funding above board, even through State funding,  have 
proved  of  no  avail.  A post  Cold  War  phenomenon,  say  some 
observers  tendering  the  most  plausible  explanation  for  the 
malaise  afflicting  the political system. When  the  ideological 
dividing  line  has blurred to extinction, say  these  observers, 
parties  have  tended  to  ignore  the  rule  book  when  raising 
resources. Political corruption, said Indira Gandhi in the  early 
Seventies,  was  a  global phenomenon. When  she  pronounced  her 
judgment,  there  were  many  in  the  political  opposition  who 
ridiculed her. How prophetic she was.
