
Poverty as a global challenge


By Karan Singh

THE  TWENTIETH Century after Christ has been the most  astounding 
one in the long and tortuous history of the human race on  Planet 
Earth. On the one hand it has seen unprecedented breakthroughs in 
science   and  technology,  trade  and  commerce,  industry   and 
manufacturing,  which have brought vast segments of  the  world's 
population  to  unprecedented  levels of  affluence.  These  have 
changed the very texture of life on earth, and the most  dramatic 
manifestation  has  been the breaking of the space  barrier,  the 
landing on the moon and the probes into the solar system and  the 
stars  beyond.  The  revolution continues, and  the  Internet  is 
rapidly becoming the symbol of a new kind of civilisation that is 
developing on the planet, cutting across traditional barriers  of 
nationality  and  religion, gender and generation,  and  knitting 
people together in ways and with long range implications that  we 
are still only dimly beginning to understand.

On  the  other  hand, this century has certainly  been  the  most 
lethal  in human history. Tens of millions of human  beings  have 
perished  in  major and minor wars, concentration camps  and  gas 
chambers,  slave  archipelagos  and racial  oppression;  and  the 
atomic  blasts in Hiroshima and Nagasaki have become a symbol  of 
the unimaginable destructive power unleashed by this very science 
and  technology.  The stockpiles of nuclear  weapons,  enough  to 
destroy not only all human beings but all life on the planet many 
times over, the wanton destruction of the biosphere and pollution 
of  the  environment; the vast areas of poverty  and  deprivation 
that exist around the world, specially in Asia, Africa and  Latin 
America;  the  malign  network  of  drugs,  arms  smuggling   and 
trafficking  in  human beings; the steady stream  of  horror  and 
violence in the movies and on television which is distorting  the 
consciousness  of  the  entire  human race  -  all  these  malign 
manifestations  have  also developed in this century.  The  human 
race is suffering from a severe attack of hubris, acting as if we 
own  the planet, mortgaging the future to the  present,  stealing 
non-renewable resources from generations yet unborn.

In the new millennium, we are confronted with crucial choices for 
human  consciousness.  The stark reality  of  widespread  poverty 
among at least 2 billion of the world's 6 billion people, and the 
fact  that 10 per cent of the human race has arrogated to  itself 
90  per cent of the world's resources, stands as a cruel  paradox 
that  we have to confront. In the ancient Hindu texts there is  a 
concept  of  the  human  race as  a  single,  extended  family  - 
Vasudhaiva kutumbakam - and yet we have a situation where farmers 
are  paid not to grow grain, and milk is poured down drains at  a 
time  when  millions  of  human  beings  are  on  the  verge   of 
starvation. The eagerly-awaited peace dividend that was  expected 
with  the  end  of the Cold War has failed  to  materialise.  The 
United Nations and its agencies - specially WHO, UNICEF, FAO  and  
UNEP  -  as well as a number of NGOs and Foundations  are  trying 
desperately  to  bridge  the gap between  the  affluent  and  the 
starving,  but in the absence of enlightened political  will  and 
decisions by the developed countries, their efforts are unable to 
make an enduring impact.

It  is true that each nation-state has to set its house in  order 
and  manage its limited resources in an efficient  and  effective 
manner.  But in many cases a breakthrough is simply not  possible 
without   substantial   cooperation  and  assistance   from   the 
international  community.  Thus, poverty  alleviation  becomes  a 
truly  global  challenge, and development the prime item  on  the 
global agenda as it is crucial for the abolition of poverty. In a 
world  rapidly  transiting to a global society,  however,  it  is 
essential  to understand and appreciate the diversity of  visions 
and aspirations that should shape the paradigm of development. It 
has  to be development with a human face, with social equity  and 
economic justice, not merely quantitative economic growth without 
realising the calamitous impact that growing unemployment or rise 
in prices of essentials can have upon the millions who eke out  a 
life   of  utter  deprivation  and  destitution.  In  their   own 
enlightened self-interest, the developed nations must drastically 
change their orientation and policies to enable them to share the 
abundance of their resources with the developing world which many 
of them literally exploited during the colonial era. At  present, 
astonishingly enough, the flow is in the opposite direction. Debt 
repayment  and brain drain together are empowering the  developed 
nations  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  developing  world,  thus 
replicating  in  a  new formulation  the  essential  features  of 
classical  colonialism. It is simply not acceptable for  humanity 
to  continue  in a situation where millions go without  a  single 
square  meal a day, while the number of multi-billionaires  grows 
steadily in the developed world. As Mahatma Gandhi said,  ``there 
is enough in this world for all men's need, but not for one man's 
greed.''

Think-tanks  in the affluent societies have begun to develop  the 
concept of `failed states' and are writing off several  countries 
of  Africa and Asia with this terminology. This is  unacceptable. 
Let  us  never  forget  that each human  being  on  this  planet, 
regardless of race or creed, religion or nationality,  represents 
a   unique  nexus  of  physical,  psychological   and   spiritual 
dimensions;  and that in the final analysis the  developed  world 
will  jeopardise its own security if it continues to  ignore  the 
less  developed areas of the planet. John Donne wrote the  famous 
words  ``Never send to ask for whom the bell tolls, it tolls  for 
Thee.''  The bell is tolling around the world, but we  must  have 
ears to hear. It almost seems as if the affluent nations are like 
the  Titanic;  glittering  with all  the  latest  technology  and 
wealth,  convinced that they are unsinkable,  blissfully  unaware 
that the massive icebergs of poverty and hunger are looming up in 
the darkness ahead.

In  this grim scenario, my own optimism flows from  a  conviction 
that  immanent  in  each  human being  is  the  nascent  glow  of  
potential  divinity, and that fanning it into the  effulgence  of 
spiritual  realisation is the highest goal of human life. But  in 
order to achieve this, a certain minimum level of material inputs 
are  absolutely  necessary, otherwise our world will  be  crowded 
with  children born with emaciated bodies and stunted  minds  who 
will never be able to play their legitimate and creative role  in 
ushering   human   civilisation   on  to  a   higher   plane   of 
consciousness.  The  population  growth  itself,  which  has  now 
crossed the 6 billion mark, one billion of whom are in India,  is 
one  of  the major challenges facing the human race.  The  planet 
simply cannot continue to support the present exponential rate of 
population  growth and, howsoever unfashionable the  concept  may 
be, it is inevitable that Malthusian checks will become operative 
if the present trends continue.

The creative potentialities of the human mind are astounding.  We 
now  have all the technologies and resources which, if used  with 
wisdom  and compassion, can abolish poverty and want, hunger  and 
malnutrition, homelessness and unemployment from the face of  the 
earth  by 2020. The question is whether we collectively have  the 
will and the wisdom to do so, or whether in our heartless  hubris 
we  will wait until the whole structure comes crashing down  upon 
us.  Implicit  in the answer to this question is  the  future  of 
humanity   and  evolution  of  human  consciousness.  Peace   and 
conflict-resolution must be key thrust areas in the next century, 
otherwise  human civilisation itself could well be in  danger  of 
self-destructing.  In particular, it is the  younger  generations 
who have to assert themselves at this juncture because they  have 
a greater vested interest in the future.

What is really needed is a spiritual revival, and I speak not  of 
different religions but of the golden thread that links  together 
all the religions of humanity. As the Rig Veda said thousands  of 
years  ago ``the Truth is one, the wise call it by many  names''. 
We  must move out of the mindset of exclusivism,  fanaticism  and 
fundamentalism  that have wrought so much havoc and suffering  on 
the  human  race  for  centuries, and move  into  a  new  era  of 
interfaith  harmony  and understanding. We have  to  find  within 
ourselves  the  spiritual  light  described  by  all  the   great 
religions  of  the world. It is only if we are able to  open  our 
hearts and minds fully to that light that it will be possible for 
us  to move beyond the cruel contradictions of the  century  past 
into a new dimension of sanity and harmony, as our planet hurtles 
headlong into the future astride the irreversible arrow of time.
