
End of import controls


IT IS UNFORTUNATE that it required an announcement in  Washington 
by  the U.S. Government for the formal news of a bilateral  trade 
agreement between India and the U.S. to reach Indian shores. Fear 
of  criticism by the political opposition and sections of  Indian 
industry had persuaded the Government that silence was necessary. 
The agreement on an accelerated time-table for the removal of all 
quantitative  restrictions  (QRs) on imports by  India  had  been 
signed  in late December. But silence does not help  in  tackling 
the issues that will arise with a shift from QRs to  tariff-based 
measures for the regulation of imports.

For  close to half a century India has been maintaining QRs on  a 
substantial proportion of its imports, which has in effect  meant 
that  the  products were either banned or permitted only  on  the 
discretion  of the Government. These controls were maintained  on 
the  ground that India had balance of payments difficulties.  But 
what  could  be justified earlier under the GATT/WTO  rules  came 
increasingly under criticism in the mid-1990s as India's  foreign 
exchange reserves remained largely over $25 billion. With all but 
a handful of countries switching over from QRs to import tariffs, 
India  was taken in 1997 to the WTO's Dispute Settlement Body  by 
the U.S. which had demanded an immediate lifting of all controls. 
Having lost that dispute, India has negotiated an agreement  that 
brings  forward  by two years, to 2001, the removal of  all  QRs. 
Though the shift to tariffs has been taking place gradually since 
1991,  the QRs that remain on 1,429 product lines are largely  in 
the `sensitive' categories of consumer products and  agriculture. 
Controls on the first lot will be removed in April this year  and 
the remaining in April 2001, though the Government is yet to make 
public  which  QRs will be removed when. The removal of  the  QRs 
will  not  mean  that  there will be  a  flood  of  imports.  The 
Government  will be able to levy import duties of its choosing  - 
provided  they are below the bound rates - in order  to  regulate 
imports.  With Indian consumers proving themselves to  be  price-
conscious,  domestic  industry should continue to enjoy  a  price 
advantage  over imported products. However, in an environment  in 
which the tendency has been to move to a lower tariff regime, the 
protection now provided by a high average import tariff will  not 
be available for long. The ability of Indian industry to  compete 
against  imports  - especially of consumer products -  will  then 
depend on both price and quality.

In  the  immediate  future,  three sets  of  issues  have  to  be 
addressed. First, decades ago India had bound its tariffs at GATT 
on  some agricultural commodities at the zero rate. This did  not 
matter  as  long as these products enjoyed protection in  the  QR 
regime.  But  if  Indian farmers and processors are  to  enjoy  a 
modicum  of  protection,  then  these  tariffs  have  to  be  re-
negotiated before all the QRs are removed. The negotiations which 
have  been going on for some time have to be  completed  quickly. 
Second, the Government will have to find a way of addressing  the  
anomalous situation of allowing import of some products which are 
reserved for production in the small-scale sector. The third  and 
high-profile  area is import of used cars. With second-hand  cars 
of  high  quality available at throwaway prices in  a  number  of 
foreign markets, imports in the post-QR regime could pose a major 
threat  to  the  producers - India and foreign  -  in  the  local 
market. Since India has so far not bound its tariffs on cars,  it 
does have the freedom of setting the import duty on used cars  at 
a  sufficiently high level to at least partially  neutralise  the 
price  disadvantage of domestic manufacturers. The  high  tariffs 
may even have to be supplemented with non-tariff measures such as 
tough  environmental norms and road-worthiness  certificates,  if 
the domestic consensus is that the investment that has been  made 
in the local automotive industry should be protected from  import 
of inexpensive second-hand vehicles.
