
Coloured history


Sir,  - Mr. K. N. Panikkar has crafted the article,  ``Countering 
the  revivalist spirit'' TheHinduSunday Magazine, Jan.  2),  most 
dexterously  and  picked  and chosen his  facts  impeccably.  His 
presentation,  too,  is beyond reproach. According  to  him,  the 
present  political scenario as well as the rise of the BJP is  an 
outcome of a process which started in the second half of the 19th 
century. 

Mr.  Panikkar  says the attacks on Christian  organisations,  the 
demolition of the Babri mosque and the communal riots are all the 
handiwork  of the fanatic RSS, BJP, etc. After coming  to  power, 
the  BJP  has usurped educational organisations and  started  the 
process  of  rewriting textbooks to brainwash students  and  make 
them communal. All this to secure a large chunk of the vote  bank 
to help it subvert secular democracy. 

I  have seen the articles by Mr. Panikkar and his  friends  which 
were directed towards the ``Hindus'' in general and the so-called 
``Hindu''  organisations  in  particular  whenever  any  communal 
incident  took  place. However, I would request Mr.  Panikkar  to 
come   to  the  areas  bordering  Bihar  and   Nepal,   dominated 
demographically  by  Muslims, and see for  himself  what  happens 
there: the dead of the ``Hindus'' are not allowed to be  cremated 
because   of  noisome  fumes,  the  madrassas  giving   vent   to 
unpatriotic  feelings,  the commission of mala fide acts  in  the 
name  of minority institutions, the conversion  of  ``infidels'', 
etc.

To  pick and choose only facts which support one's point of  view 
is  not desirable for a ``historian''. It is literary alchemy.  I 
do  request  you  all (historians of a  secular  orientation)  to 
venture  out  of the metros and see what is happening  in  remote 
Thakurgunj and Madhubani in Bihar. The Hindus have neither had  a 
system of fatwas nor do they believe in international  terrorism. 
They  prefer  the nation to religion. To fight for  survival  can 
never be termed being communal. 

As for the vote bank, the Hindus are not guided by one  religious 
head simply because the ``Hindu'' consists of divisions through a 
large  number  of  sects  and  sub-sects  which  have  their  own 
philosophies  and  are further sub-divided into castes  and  sub-
castes.  The ``Hindu'' community has never been one  large  chunk 
and  thus  suffered a big jolt from the Mandal effect.  So  where 
does  the  question arise of the BJP cultivating a vote  bank  to 
subvert democracy and yet be in power in the future? 

Tejkar Jha,

Patna
