
The missionary mandate


Sir,  - This is with reference to Mr. Harish Khare's articles  on 
the  anniversary  of the Dangs episode (Gujarat Diary - I  &  II, 
TheHindu,   Jan.  3  and  4).  The  allegation  is   that   Hindu 
organisations   are  labelling  educational,  health  and   other 
services rendered by Christians as a mission for conversion. This 
is  not  a  discovery by any of these  organisations.  The  World 
Conference  of  Missionary Council stated  unequivocally,  ``Care 
should be taken to secure that evangelism has a central place  in 
all medical and educational institutions.'' Richter, a  committed 
author  who wrote a book on the Christian missionaries in  India, 
expressed   unambiguously   the   aim  and   objective   of   the 
missionaries:  ``Missions  have neither a call nor a  mandate  to 
teach   English  literature,  history,  mathematics  or   natural 
science.  The preaching of gospel to heathen and the exercise  of 
pastoral  care over the relative churches are the head and  front 
of  all missionary labour; and everything must be  considered  as 
pure waste which does not directly further this end.''

Gandhiji often quoted General Booth of the Salvation Army writing 
to his son: ``The social work is like a bait, but it is salvation 
that  is the hook that lands the fish.'' If you go  through  Lord 
Macaulay's   famous  speech  in  the  British  Parliament,   this 
intention of the missionaries can easily be understood.

Even  Mr. Nripen Chakraborty, former Chief Minister  of  Tripura, 
said  on  the  floor  of  the  Assembly:  ``The  Christians   are 
converting  by  giving Rs. 250 per head to the  local  tribals.'' 
Christianity  as practised in our country is more political  than 
spiritual.  The  National Council of Churches of  India,  at  its 
convention  held at Nagpur on May 22, 1998, deplored the  Pokhran 
tests. The same body, at its convention held near  Pathanamthitta 
in  Kerala,  influenced the Christians to vote for a  party.  The 
church  is behind the downfall of many Governments and kings  and 
disintegration  and collapse of many kingdoms and  nations.  This 
political hand of Christianity extends up to Kerala. In the book, 
`The Dynasty' by Adams & Phillip Whitehead (B.B.C Producers),  it 
has been pointed out that ``Funding for opposition to the  Kerala 
communists,  channelled through the churches, poured in from  the 
USA.''

B.R.K. Gauthaman,

Chennai
