
The advanced jet trainer


By Narendra Gupta

EVERY  AIR force has accidents which cost that country dearly  in 
terms  of  highly  trained  costly  aircrew  and  very  expensive 
aeroplanes.  These accidents are generally caused by human  error 
or  by mechanical malfunction. To minimise such accidents in  the 
Indian  Air Force, a review of the training patterns and  syllabi 
was undertaken in 1984 by a committee headed by Air Marshal D. A. 
LaFontaine.

At  that time, and now also, the IAF's budding pilots were  given 
their  initial  flying  training on basic trainers  such  as  the 
Bangalore-built  Kiran  or the Polish Iskra.  Subsequently,  they 
need  to  obtain experience on an advanced trainer  plane  before 
they   start  to  fly  modern  high-speed  and   high-performance 
aircraft. The advanced jet trainer (AJT) would in performance  be 
in  between  the basic trainer and the operational  aircraft.  It 
would  be simpler to fly and therefore more forgiving  to  pilot-
induced errors. It would also be easier to maintain in order that 
it  can  be quickly made ready for flying so that  more  training 
sorties can be generated.

The  induction  of new operational fighters such as  the  MiG-27, 
MiG-29, Mirage 2000 and the SU30 have brought with them a quantum 
jump  in  technology and operational capability.  Therefore,  the 
advanced trainer has to have similar advanced technologies and be 
capable  of delivering those weapons currently in the  Air  Force 
inventory,  along  with state-of-the-art  navigation  and  weapon 
aiming   systems.  Thus  training  becomes  realistic   and   the 
transition to current operational aircraft is not difficult.  The 
trainer  plane  has  to  have the ability  to  carry  out  combat 
manoeuvres  safely  and also have the instrumentation to  fly  in 
adverse  weather. During operations, this fighter has also to  be 
useable  for  ground  attack. In the 1965 war  the  then  piston-
engined  advanced trainer, the Harvard, was used  in  mountainous 
terrain  where  its lower speed was useful  for  manoeuvering  in 
valleys and carrying out interdiction and attacks.

The  LaFontaine  Committee recommended the acquisition of  a  new 
plane which would replace the Hunter jets then in use as advanced 
training  planes. The requirement was urgent as the Hunters  were 
coming  to  the end of their useful life. The IAF carried  out  a 
study  of  the available advanced trainer aircraft,  initiated  a 
case  and  short-listed the British-built Hawk  and  the  Franco-
German Alpha Jet.

However, the Government of India took no decision on the AJT  and 
costs have kept on escalating. It is estimated that these  planes 
would  now  cost  about  $15  million  a  piece  along  with  the 
associated ground and maintenance support equipment. To  re-equip 
its  training  units the IAF needs about 100 such  machines.  The  
overall cost may be high but it could be appropriately phased out 
so as not to cause an unacceptable financial burden at one  time. 
There would also be transfer of technology to produce the  planes 
in India along with a buy-back arrangement for spare parts.

In  the  meantime, the Hunters went out of service  and  the  IAF 
decided to use the old MiG-21FLs (Type-77) as an interim airplane 
for  imparting operational flying training. This has gone on  for 
many  years  and the stage has now come that the  MiG-21FLs  have 
also become old and unviable and have to be discarded.

There  are now two choices confronting the IAF. Either it  starts 
using the MiG-21 Bis, a later variant, for this task. This  would 
amount  to reverting the frontline fighter, which is now  in  the 
process  of getting a mid-life operational update, to a  training 
role.  Or,  it  gets the Government to accept  the  purchase  and 
acquisition  of  an advanced jet trainer. The first  option  will 
reduce  the operational capability of the IAF as  these  fighters 
would  then  not be readily available for operations  at  forward 
bases   in  operational  squadrons.  Although  some   operational 
training in flying teaching institutions would be possible in the 
MiG-21  Bis,  it  would be without the full  benefit  of  quality 
operational training which can come only from the type of trainer 
aircraft needed for the purpose. In an advanced training aircraft 
repeated  combat exercises can be carried out safely in order  to 
give the trainee pilot total familiarisation with the full combat 
envelope. This is the only way flying skills and reflexes can  be 
honed  to the levels necessary for successful fighter flying.  At 
the  same time, this training will be at a cost much  lower  than 
that incurred in using operational planes. The lower  expenditure 
is  in terms of operating costs as well as in reduced  losses  in 
training accidents which would be fewer on simpler-to-fly trainer 
aircraft,  as  compared to the likelihood of  losses  during  the 
training   of  inexperienced  pilots  on  the   complicated   and 
sophisticated operational types.

The  Government not purchasing an advanced jet trainer all  these 
years  defies logic. It has to be accepted that the IAF  is  very 
serious  about getting such a plane, but somehow it has not  been 
able  to convince the bureaucracy about the urgency of the  need. 
Other  air forces have similar requirements and are able to  meet 
them  expeditiously by going about the  identification,  analysis 
and  procurement process systematically and in a timely  fashion. 
In the Australian Air Force, the procurement was done within four 
years  of  the  need  being felt. This  time  includes  that  for 
identification of the qualitative requirements, selection of  the 
plane, placing the order and obtaining it.

In  the  case of the IAF, the requirement was  drafted  about  20 
years ago. However, active considerations for the  identification 
of the plane to be imported commenced in the early Eighties.  The 
same  shortlist has remained - the Hawk and the Alpha  Jet.  Both 
tandem-seating  trainers meet the qualitative requirements  spelt 
out  by  the IAF. They have state-of- the-art weapon  aiming  and 
navigation  systems, can carry the latest weapons, and  have  all  
the  manoeuvrability and software needed for  graduating  fighter 
pilots  to fly combat planes effectively. Both  trainer  aircraft 
have been produced in large numbers, have been bought by many air 
forces,  and are reliable in terms of flying characteristics  and 
ease  of  maintenance.  Both can be used  as  second-line  ground 
attack  fighters in the eventuality of a conflict. Probably,  the 
recent visit to India of the Royal Air Force's Hawk-equipped  Red 
Arrows aerobatics team was an exercise in hardsell of that plane.

It  is  believed  that the AJT requirement  has  been  given  top 
priority  by the present Government. Nevertheless, the danger  is 
that  in  the long drawn out decision-making,  the  objective  of 
having  an operational trainer which will remain compatible  with 
modern  combat  aircraft of the next decade is likely  to  become 
lost.  Or,  the  urgent  need  may  get  subordinated  to   other 
considerations,  if not totally ignored by a Defence Ministry  in 
which service headquarters are not integral.

However,  it  must be noted that the acquiring of the AJT  is  no 
immediate  panacea for the combat training problems of  the  IAF. 
After the induction of the trainer plane, successive  generations 
of young pilots will receive proper training and it will be a few 
years  before an adequate number of the AJT-trained aircrew  will 
percolate   to  operational  units,  improving  the  safety   and 
operational capability of the air arm.

Meanwhile,  flight  safety is being jeopardised  and  operational 
preparedness  is suffering, as without a proper advanced  trainer 
many  combat  exercises have to be restricted or deleted  in  the 
training  syllabi.  Perhaps it is not  understood  by  Government 
functionaries  that just producing pilots to fly  fighter  planes 
for  displays and flypasts is only a small  confidence-  building 
measure  for public consumption. What the country pays big  bucks 
for and needs is combat pilots who are trained to fly, fight  and 
win  against an adversary. It has to be remembered that  in  war, 
there are no prizes for a runner-up.

(The writer is a retired Air Vice-Marshal).
