
Telco to enter luxury segment


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 12. Putting its modest performance in selling the 
Indica  behind,  Telco  today announced plans  to  manufacture  a 
luxury car - Magna - and unveiled a two seater concept sports car 
`Aria'  based  on  the Indica platform. ``There  will  be  robust 
growth in the next two years with 60 to 65 per cent growth due to 
take  place  in the low end,'' said the Telco  chief,  Mr.  Ratan 
Tata,  while justifying the move to produce a car which could  be 
priced above the top of the line luxury cars in India such as the 
Lancer and Honda.

Dwelling  on the attributes of the Magna, Mr. Tata said the  1900 
cc powered car would be available in petrol and diesel  versions. 
Subsequently,  higher powered engines will be available. The  car 
is  expected to hit Indian roads within a year but there will  be 
no attempt to speed up its launch because the company would  like 
to be first satisfied with its performance.

The Tata Aria, unveiled by a Bollywood filmstar, is a  two-seater 
roadster concept and has been developed by Tata Engineering along 
with  Italy's Idea Institute. It has been conceived as a  vehicle 
for  the young and young at heart and seeks to  combine  motoring 
pleasure  with the exhilaration of sportiness and freedom.  Meant 
for  a  maximum  speed of 225 kmph, it is  currently  on  display 
without   a   roof  top  but  lends  itself   to   various   roof 
configurations.

The Tata pavilion at the Auto Expo also features several versions 
of  existing  models including the Tata Indica 2000  which  is  a 
petrol powered 75 bhp engine, a face-lifted version of Tata  Sumo 
Premia with a new front and a tighter body design and the Euro II 
diesel  Indica. Like the Sumo, a face-lifted Tata Sierra is  also 
on display.

Mr. Tata referred to these variations while refuting  suggestions 
that the launch of the Toyota-Kirloskar's Qualis will dent  sales 
of Sumo. ``The way forward is to launch new products on the  same 
platform, keep costs down and ensure customer satisfaction,''  he 
reasoned.
