
M&As;: Failures or successes?


The  wave  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  is  growing  in  size. 
Globally,  1999 ended with a record value of M&As;, crossing  $2.4 
trillion. Now we have the AOL-Warner merger which is the  largest 
single merger ever. The AOL-Warner merger is expected to  unleash 
more  such  amalgamations in the U.S. as internet  companies  and 
traditional  media  firms jump on to the new bandwagon.  The  M&A; 
wave has reached Indian shores as well, with December  witnessing 
a spate of mergers in the cement, garment and IT industries.

M&As;  are justified on many grounds - synergy,  agglomeration  to 
fend  off  competition,  mergers to build  up  global  locational 
advantages, alliances to keep pace with technological change  and 
more. But do M&As; really work? Does the profitability of the  new 
and  larger  firm  increase  after  the  merger?  Is  post-merger 
efficiency   better  than  pre-merger  efficiency?  And  by   the 
yardstick  of  share  prices, are shareholders of  the  new  firm 
better off than before?

It  is  too early to ask these questions of the  M&As;  that  have 
taken  place in India. But in the midst of the M&A; mania that  is 
sweeping the world it is worth noting that the evidence from  the 
distant as well as the more recent past in the advanced countries 
is  that  more  often than not M&As; end up as  failures  on  most 
counts.

A few years ago, in a volume of essays published in honour of Dr. 
Manmohan  Singh,  Prof. Ajit Singh of  Cambridge  University  had 
pointed out that research on the effect of M&As; during the  1980s 
had shown that on the average post-merger profitability was lower 
than before. And since after the amalgamation the new firm  would 
have  a  greater monopoly power than  the  pre-merger  individual 
firms,  this decline in average profitability meant a decline  in 
efficiency  at the level of the firm as well.  However,  research 
using  stock  market  data showed that the market  value  of  the 
acquired firm increased by about 20 per cent , while that of  the 
acquiring firm remained about the same.

That  was  in  the  1980s.  The  era  of  hostile  takeovers  and 
acquisitions gave way in the 1990s to mutually agreed to  mergers 
and  share  swaps.  But that has not changed  things  much  -  if 
anything,  shareholder value too now shows signs of a decline  in 
the  post-merger situation. Last year, the consultancy KPMG in  a 
survey in the U.S. and the EU of 107 M&A; cases one year after the 
event  found that in only 17 per cent of the cases was  there  an 
addition  to  value.  In 30 per cent of the  M&As;  there  was  no 
significant change and in a majority - 53 per cent - there was  a 
fall in shareholder value.

In  yet  another survey of research on the effect  of  M&As;,  the 
United  Nations Conference on Trade and Development in its  World 
Investment  Report  1999  noted that  the  ``strategic  comfort''  
afforded  by a larger size - protection against takeovers  -  was 
what  was  driving an increase in the number of  M&As;  in  recent 
years, ``notwithstanding the fact that a number of these deals do 
not  result  in increased performance.'' In a survey of  M&As;  in 
early  1999, The Economist magazine noted that two out  of  every 
three mergers ended up in failure.

There  are  a  number of reasons why M&As; on the  whole  seem  to 
result in a poorer performance after the amalgamation. Too little 
prior preparation on integration is one reason. A related one  is 
haste  in rushing through with the merger. A clash of cultures  - 
especially  in cross-border mergers - is another.  A  demoralised 
staff  anxious  about lay-offs and redundancies  is  yet  another 
cause of failed mergers. 

CRR
