
Chotrani annexes title


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 12. With a display that was  innovative,  incisive 
and  immaculate,  29-year-  old Manish  Chotrani  of  Maharashtra 
dethroned the reigning champion, Ritwik Bhattacharya of Delhi, to 
step on to the pedestal as the national men's squash champion  at 
the MRC courts here on Wednesday evening. The score-line, 9-4, 9-
1,  9-5,  perhaps  conveys the authoritative  touch  that  Manish 
projected on the court enroute to a memorable victory. 

In  scripting a maiden triumph in the National and on his  second 
appearance,  aside  from conquering Ritwik for  the  first  time, 
Manish  completed  a sweep for Maharashtra  in  the  competition. 
Earlier,  Mekala Subedar retained the women's title, with  Bikram 
Uberoi   and   Deepali  Anvekar  taking  the   boys   and   girls 
championships respectively on the concluding day. 

With  Manish  in such irrepressible form, there was  little  that 
Ritwik  could  do. It must be admitted, for no  palpable  reason, 
Ritwik  was phlegmatic for the major part, slipping often into  a 
pool of errors. On the contrary, Manish was composed,  consistent 
and crafty, minimising his mistakes, and maintaining a tight grip 
almost  throughout barring a brief lead of 5-4 held by Ritwik  in 
the third game. 

Profiting   on  the  bad  start  by  Ritwik,  the  Mumbai   based 
businessman,  Manish,  seeded number two, launched  a  blistering 
attack  to lead 5-0 in the opening game, and thereafter it was  a 
smooth cruise to 9-4. In the second, Manish was the master of all 
he  surveyed  conceding just the solitary point. Egged  on  by  a 
section of the crowd, Ritwik made a conscious effort to  comeback 
into  the  match. True, he played a few stunning  shots  but  the 
sparkle  was  evanescent. He did rally from 1-4 to 4-4  and  then 
surged to 5-4, but Manish seized the initiative to push his rival 
into  repeated  imperfections both near the tin and at  the  back 
court.

Mekala  Subedar  needed  just  36  minutes  to  dispose  of   the 
challenge,  or  whatever  that Deepali  Anvekar  managed  to  put 
across. Unperturbed and utterly confident, Mekala went about  her 
task with methodical efficiency. There were moments when  Deepali 
managed to convey her feelings as being a victim of a few adverse 
rulings  by the referee, But measured in terms of proficiency  on 
the court, Mekala was far superior. 

So upset was Deepali that at the end of the second game she threw 
her racquet on the court and promptly received a warning from the 
referee.  Twice,  she  came in line of the  ball,  and  sustained 
painful  blows on her right leg. After raising some hope  in  the 
first  game,  Deepali  was simply overpowered by  the  wiles  and 
guiles of the reigning champion, Mekala Subedar.  

Happily,   the   host  unit,  the  Tamil  Nadu   Squash   Rackets 
Association,  did not go empty handed. Rajiv Reddy  ensured  that 
with  a  title triumph in the veterans category  (45  and  above) 
beating B.I. Singh of Delhi in four games. 

Mr.  Gowri Shankar, Secretary, Education, Tamil Nadu  Government, 
presided   and  gave  away  the  prizes.  Mr.  N.   Ramachandran, 
President, TNSRA and Secretary General, Squash Rackets Federation 
of  India,  welcomed the gathering. The men and  women  champions 
received  each  Rs. 25,000 and Rs. 15,000, while  the  runners-up 
claimed Rs. 15,000 and Rs. 7,500 respectively. 

lThe  results  (finals):  Men: Manish Chotrani  (Mah)  bt  Ritwik 
Bhattacharya  (Delhi) 9-4, 9-1, 9-5. Women: Mekala Subedar  (Mah) 
bt Deepali Anvekar (Maha) 9-5, 9-2, 9-2; Boys (under-19):  Bikram 
Uberoi (Mah) bt Mihir Kapoor (Maha) 9-4, 9-0, 9-0; Girls  (under-
19): Deepali Anvekar (Maha) bt Vaidehi Reddy (TN) 9-7, 9-5,  9-2; 
Professionals: Dalip Tripathi (UP) bt Santosh More (Mah) 9-7,  9-
3, 1-9, 9-5; Veterans: (over 35): R.S. Brar (SSCB) bt Vaman  Apte 
(Mah)  9-1,  9-2, 9-1; (over 45) Rajiv Reddy (TN) bt  B.I.  Singh 
(Delhi) 4-9, 9-5, 9-6, 9-2.
