
Another Indian sob story


By G. Viswanath

MELBOURNE,  JAN.  12. A mode of dismissal that  naturally  evokes 
sympathy  than  scorn  rendered a heartbreaking  defeat  for  the 
Indian cricketers on Wednesday night at the MCG. Sachin Tendulkar 
was scampering home for a second run when Shane Lee's top-of-the-
stumps  throw  from deep square and a pronto flick of  the  bails 
resulted  in  the  Indian captain's premature  exit.  But  Sourav 
Ganguly,  playing  his  127th International  was  guilty  of  not 
attempting  to ground his bat when Andrew Symonds'  throw  struck 
the target.

The  slow  motion replays may not have given  a  most  conclusive 
verdict,  but  third umpire Bill Sheahan was convinced  that  the 
left  hander was strolling at brisk pace down the pitch with  his 
bat  in  the  air.  Ganguly who  notched  his  first  century  in 
Australia  and showed the spirit and gumption to take the  battle 
into  the  rival  camp was probably more  `out'  than  `in'  when 
Symonds  hit  the stumps. The Indian bid for a first win  in  the 
Carlton  &  United  series vanished in the  thin  night  air  and 
eventually Australia won the match by 28 runs. 

The  loss  by  a narrow margin was another big  blow  to  India's 
chances of making the final of the championship. To make  headway 
from  here  will mean crossing several hurdles which  India  will 
face  in the next six matches. Tendulkar's team must win  against 
Australia on Friday at Sydney to be in the running for a place in 
the  final that will be played in February. The only  plus  point 
for the Indians was that they fought a match that seemed to  have 
slipped away from it at the interval itself.

By  sending  Sameer  Dighe to bat after the  fall  of  the  first 
wicket,  India's  captain  and  coach  showed  a  clear  lack  of 
sensitivity.  Dighe  was no solution to protect the out  of  form 
Rahul Dravid. If the intention was to use him as a pinch  hitter, 
the  gamble failed. The Mumbai wicketkeeper is playing  only  his 
second  one-day  International and his dismissal, in  an  awkward 
manner, was more a blessing than a serious damage and might  have 
cocked  a  snook  at the very people who  took  the  decision  to 
promote him.

The  109-run stand between Ganguly and Dravid was a superb  fight 
back.  Although they were not touching a run rate to  ruffle  and 
rock the Australian's, they at least sent a clear message to  the 
rival captain that they were right there and keen to sustain  the 
contest to the finish. It was after he had reached

his  tenth century in one day Internationals that Ganguly fell  a 
victim  to  his own mistake. It made certain  of  India's  second 
defeat in three days. 

On way to stardom

Ricky  Ponting has been the run making machine of the  Australian 
summer.  He  is a new generation Tasmanian who has been  seen  in 
full  tilt this season, which is the pace he set for  himself  to 
successfully  build  a  reputation and careen  close  to  achieve 
cricketing  stardom. He might have the world at his feet  in  his 
future cricketing years, the potential of which has been  evident 
in  his first five years of international cricket. He  made  more 
number  of  runs than any other Australian batsman in  six  Tests 
against Pakistan and India.

On  Wednesday  he was the most  functioning  Australian  batsman, 
pummelling the Indian bowling and scoring a third century against 
them  in  one-day Internationals. His fine  and  positive  effort 
narrowed the result and the two points going Australia's way. His 
effort  which ranged between the fine, magnificent  and  elegant, 
made sure that Australia's innings in the third match of the C  & 
U series would terminate only at a total well past 250.

The  pocket-sized  Ponting  is  quintessentially  an   aggressive 
batsman who thrives in both forms of the game. He represented the 
very  heart  and  soul  of the Australian  innings  that  took  a 
specific and a snappy course in day light. He was instrumental in 
sizing up the Indian new ball attack in Javagal Srinath and  Ajit 
Agarkar  who by now have proved to be the effective  combination. 
It must, however be said that without the great helping hand from 
Venkatsai Laxman at second slip, the Australian openers might not 
have gone cheaply.

Laxman  was  able to hold the two catches because he was  not  in 
line  with  the  first slip in Ganguly, but at least  a  yard  in 
front.  It  was Gilchrist's initial tentative  approach  and  the 
bowler's  line  and  bounce that took the edge to  the  right  of 
second slip where Laxman went diving to hold the catch with  both 
hands.  The  second edge came straight at him,  with  Mark  Waugh 
closing  the face of the bat to a delivery from Agarkar that  was 
slanted in and appeared to have held its course. It all boils  to 
a  matter  of  inches and in this case the Waugh  who  opens  the 
innings  for Australia paid the price for venturing into  a  shot 
too early in the innings.

Ponting  gave  a sketch to the impending masterpiece  he  was  to 
carve in the afternoon when he cover drove Agarkar. He picked the 
line  from in front of the front pad which he had  already  moved 
forward to make a cracking shot. The pull off Srinath appeared to 
be a chancy. It But it was not a high-risk shot in the early part 
of the first fifteen overs when nine men were inside the circle.

He was in his element, square driving India's strike bowler three 
times  in the seventh over of the Australian innings.  The  first 
shot  raced to the fence in front of point where  Jacob  Martin's 
initial response was a reflex action to stop the ball. The second 
one  was  a ditto shot which forced Tendulkar to  place  a  short 
point,  but  Ponting  challenged both placing  his  shot  between  
close-in and the point fielder.

Left  hander Michael Bevan who has been a position at No.  4  was 
lucky  to survive the third wicket stand. He was yards away  from 
his ground when Agarkar's direct attempt failed to hit the stumps 
at the straight end. Australia's score was 26 for 2 and Bevan had 
made  just opened his account. The stand progressed to  raise  99 
runs  before the left hander scooped a catch to mid on. It was  a 
phase that saw Ponting as the major ally in the partnership.

The  pulled six off Srinath over square leg got him to  his  half 
century  in 47 balls which was better than par  performance  from 
the Tasmanian.

The  Indians hit back in the last ten overs. The exit of  Ponting 
in the 40th over and immediately after Australia had crossed  the 
200-run mark put the skids on the Australian innings, though they 
still  ended up setting a high target of 270. Tendulkar  who  let 
off  Ponting at 110 at mid wicket, held a catch soon that  was  a 
dolly when the century maker hit a full toss to widish mid on.

The  Indians were smart on the field which helped them to  regain 
the  initiative after the dismissal of Ponting who himself  might 
have seen his captain in a way sacrificing his wicket. The  relay 
from  Srinath to Tendulkar at the bowler's end and from there  to 
the  wicketkeeper  moved as if the entire exercise was  timed  to 
precision. 

AUSTRALIA

M. Waugh c Laxman b Agarkar             7
(15b)
A. Gilchrist c Laxman b Srinath         3
(2b)
R. Ponting c Tendulkar b Srinath      115
(121b, 9x4s, 1x6)
M. Bevan c Agarkar b Robin Singh       41
(54b, 3x4s)
S. Waugh (run out)                     23
(31b, 3x4s)
D. Martyn c Tendulkar b Kumble         30
(45b)
A. Symonds (run out)                    3
(4b)
S. Lee (not out)                       22
(15b, 1x6)
D. Fleming (not out)                   14
(13b)
Extras (b-1, lb-2, w-8)                11
                                      ---
Total (for seven wkts. in 50 overs)   269
                                      ---


Fall  of wkts: 1-10 (Gilchrist), 2-19 (M. Waugh), 3-118  (Bevan), 
4-156  (S.  Waugh),  5-227  (Ponting),  6-232  (Symonds),   7-234 
(Martyn).

India Bowling: Srinath 10-0-52-2, Agarkar 9-0-47-1, Prasad  10-0-
52-0,  Tendulkar  3-0-23-0,  Kumble  10-0-57-1,  Robin  3-0-19-1, 
Ganguly 5-0-16-0.

INDIA

V.V.S. Laxman c Gilchrist b McGrath       2
(15b)
S. Ganguly (run out)                    100
(127b, 10x4s, 1x5)
S. Dighe c M. Waugh b Fleming             3
(25b)
S. Tendulkar (run out)                   12
(11b, 2 x 4s)
R. Dravid c Martyn b S. Lee              60
(85b, 2x4s)
Robin Singh (not out)                    33
(34b, 1x4, 1x6)
J. Martin (run out)                       0
(1b)
A. Agarkar (not out)                      6
(9b)
Extras (lb-8, nb-7, w-10)                25
                                        ---
Total (for six wkts. in 50 overs)       241
                                        ---

Fall  of wkts: 1-7 (Laxman), 2-31 (Dighe), 3-68  (Tendulkar),  4- 
177 (Ganguly), 5-212 (Dravid), 6-212 (Martin)

Australia Bowling: McGrath 10-1-32-1, Fleming 10-1-39- 1, B.  Lee 
10-0-49-0, S. Lee 10-0-57-1, Symonds 5-0-28-0, Martyn 5-0-28- 0.



