
Venkataramana forges ahead, in sole lead


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD, JAN. 12. J. Venkataramana (ICF) with 7.5 points forged 
ahead  as the sole leader at the end of the eighth round  in  the 
Global  Trust  Bank  sponsored FIDE rated all  India  Open  chess 
tournament  conducted  by the Chess Association of  Hyderabad  in 
Secunderabad.  V.  Koshy  and  B.T.  Muralikrishnan  of  Southern 
Railway were in joint second position with seven each.

Venkataramana,  playing  with black pieces against A.  Sanker  on 
Wednesday,  began  with  an Alapin  variation  of  the  Sicillian 
defence  but decided to deviate early when he moved his queen  to 
c7. 

Sankar  on the 12th move made a risky Nc4 move and lost  a  vital 
pawn  at  f4.  After that Venkataramana was  quick  to  grab  the 
opportunity and did not allow Sankar any scope to manouevre. 

The  latter  again made a weak move on the 21st  by  putting  his 
Queen on g5 square and lost a knight later. With a good  material 
advantage  Venkataramana  had  little  difficulty  thereafter  in 
converting the situation into victory in 37 moves.

On  the  second board Muralikrishnan continued his good  show  by 
holding  former  Asian Junior champion and  International  Master 
Tejas Bakre of Indian Airlines to a draw. 

Tejas  began with a King pawn opening and in reply  Murali  opted 
for a Phillidor defence. 

However, the game took an unusual turn later and went along lines 
similar to a Najdorf variation of the Sicillian defence.  Tejas's 
efforts  to increase his opening advantage were well thwarted  by 
Muralikrishnan and the contest ended in a draw after 30 moves.

V.  Koshy resgistered a fine victory over R.  Balasubramanian  of 
ICF  on  the  third board. Koshy again  went  for  his  favourite 
English opening and was able to obtain a significant  territorial 
advantage. 

In  a Queen and Bishop end game, Balasubramanian was able to  set 
up connected passers on the ``b'' and ``c'' files. 

But a determined Koshy showed his expertise in end game play  and 
tied down black's pieces despite material disadvantage. Unable to 
progress  further  with  two  passers  in  a  Zugzwang  position, 
Balasubramanian lost his queen and the game on the 52nd move.

Laltu  Chaterjee of Eastern Railway gave a good performance  when 
he held IM elect Vishal Sareen of LIC to a draw while N.K. Mishra 
and  S.K.  Sinha scored facile wins over Dilip Pagay  and  Roktim  
Bandhopadhyaya respectively.

*The results:

A. Sankar (6.5) lost to J. Venkataramana (7.5); Tejas Bakre (6.5) 
drew  with  B.T.  Muralikrishnan (7); Koshy Verghese  (7)  bt  R. 
Balasubramanian  (6);  Laltu  Chaterjee (6.5)  drew  with  Vishal 
Sareen (6.5); K. Gunasekaran (6) drew with P. Konguvel (6);  N.K. 
Mishra (6.5) bt Dilip Pagay (5.5); S.C. Subramanian (6) drew with 
Suvrajit  Saha  (6);  T.S. Ravi (6) drew  with  Dilip  Das  (67); 
Amardip  Bartakke  (6) drew with S.S. Soman  (6);  Santosh  Kumar 
Sinha (6.5) bt Roktim Bandhopadhyaya (5.5); K. Ramu (5.5) lost to 
Jayant Gokhale (6); C.S. Gokhale (5.5) drew with M. Sruinivas Rao 
(5.5);  R.M. Dongre (5) lost to Atanu Lahiri (6);  Kantilal  Dave 
(5.5) drew with Sunil Kumar Rathore (5.5); Yashraj Aidasani (5.5) 
drew  with  M.B. Muralidharan (5.5); Rahul G. Shetty  (6)  bt  K. 
Gopalakrishnan  (5); P.D.S. Grinath (6) bt K.V.S.  Sudhakar  (5); 
Manoj Kumar Panigrahi (6) bt M. Rajendra (5); Manish Joshi  (5.5) 
drew  with Adway Chowdhury (5.5); M.Y. Raju (55) drew  with  R.K. 
Mishra (5.5).
