
Question Corner 


Bulge after bite

QUESTION:  Why  do we get a bulge on the skin  after  a  mosquito 
bite?

ANSWER:Stings  of insecta group animals like mosquito cause  skin 
lesions by direct effects of the insect parts or secretions which 
cause  irritation.  When  the  insect  parts  or  secretions  are 
retained  for  sometime  they  tend  to  cause   hypersensitivity 
responses.  The immediate itching effect on the site of the  bite 
is   the   appearence   of   urticaria   or   inflamed   papules. 
Histologiically  the  lesion  shows a  wedge  shaped  pervascular 
infiltrate of the lymphocytes, histocytes and eosinophils  within 
the dermis.

The  first event of the inflamation is an increased bloodflow  to 
the  bite  area.  This  results  mainly  due  to  the  arteriolar 
dialation.  Another event is the increased vascular  permeability 
which  results in the accumulation of protein rich  extravascular 
fluid.

The  major chemical mediator of inflamation is the histamine.  It 
is  widely distributed in the tissues, the richest  source  being 
the  mast  cells  that are normally  present  in  the  corrective 
tissues  adjacent  to the blood vessels. Preformed  histamine  is 
present  in  mast  cell granules and is  released  by  mast  cell 
degranulation  process which in response to the  stimulus  caused 
due to irritation at the site of the bite. This histamine  causes 
dialation  of the arterioles and increases vascular  permeability 
of  venules. This in turn causes venular endothelial  contraction 
and  widening of the interendothelial cell junctions,  where  the 
extravascular fluid accumulates causing inflamation.

S Palaniappan, Pudukkotai

* * *

Single phase motor

QUESTION:What  will  be the speed variation when a  single  phase 
4800  RPM, HP,60 Hz, 220 volts motor is made to run on  a  single 
phase  50  Hz,  220  volts  supply?  Will  it  burn  out  or  get 
overheated? Is it safe to run on a continous basis giving load to 
it? 

ANSWER  1:  For  an  uncontrolled  single  phase  squirrel   cage 
inductionmotor connected to the 60 Hz, 220 V supply, the  highest 
"ideal  no  load  synchronous speed" is 3600 rpm  for  a  2  pole 
machine.4800rpm can only be achieved through a step up gear ratio 
of 4:3. Depending on the type of motor design and load, the rated 
full  load slip can be anywhere between 3 per cent to 5 per  cent  
i.e the rated full load speed could be anywhere between 4656  rpm 
to 4560 rpm.

On connection to a 50 Hz, 220V supply, two things happen: that is 
the  ideal no load synchronous speed is reduced to 4000 rpm  from 
4800 rpm. The magnetic circuit flux density which is  propotional 
to  the volts/Hz is approximately increased by 20 per  cent.  The 
latter  has  wo consequences: the rated full  load  slip  becomes 
lower  (say  2-4 per cent) and consequently the full  load  speed 
could lie between 3920 rpm and 3840 rpm.

The increased flux density at a reduced frequency brings a change 
in the core losses. Due to the nonlinear functional relationships 
between these loss components with the flux density and frequency 
values, the resulting core losses may or may not increase.  Total 
losses  at  50 Hz/220 V operation then need  not  necessarily  be 
always   much   higher  than  that  at  60   Hz/220V   operation. 
Consequently,  burn out need not always occur. Only if  the  load 
vis a constant power load, at 1Hp at a reduced speeds of 3920  to 
3840  rpm (as compared to 4656 to 4560 rpm), continous  operation 
may not be possible at all.

S.S.Yegna Narayanan, Chennai

ANSWER  2: Since speed is propotional to frequency, in the  above 
case the speed of the motor will reduce to a rated value of  4000 
rpm  and  the actual value little less like 3900 rpm due  to  the 
slip  of the machine. Consequently, the effiency of  the  machine 
will  also  go down. It is advisable to run the motor at  80  per 
cent of the rated load to prevent over heating/burn out

D.Vasudevan, Chennai
