
When will man and machine merge? 


With  computers becoming faster, smaller - and smarter,  we  have 
finally entered the new century when they are predicted to  match 
-  and even surpass - human intelligence. That day may be  closer 
than  we ever imagined, finds ANAND PARTHASARATHY, as  he  traces 
the timeline to a superintelligent machine.

ARTHUR CLARKE put an exact date to it. In 2001: A Space  Odyssey, 
the  short story which in 1968, became a famous  Stanley  Kubrick 
film,  he  sketched  a scenario where the  computer  on  board  a 
spaceship,  becomes  cleverer  than its  creators.  The  computer 
called HAL, finally takes over the spaceship. 

Clarke has been remarkably prescient in the past. He foretold the 
development  of  geosynchronous  communication  satellites,  with 
stunning  accuracy.  So  it  is not  unreasonable  to  ask:  will 
computers overtake human intelligence sometime next year? 

The   answer  engaged  ``futurists''  and  computer   specialists 
throughout  the fading months of the last century - and at  least 
one expert has laid out a precise timetable for the  development: 
Dr.Ray Kurzweil, US- based Artificial Intelligence (AI) guru  and 
Speech  Recognition pioneer, in a provocative and prophetic  book 
published  last  year,  ``The Age  of  Spiritual  Machines:  When 
Computers Exceed Human Intelligence''. He suggests that:

- By 2020 computers which have the same intelligence as the human 
brain  -  which is capable of about 20 billion  calculations  per 
second-  will  be available for $ 1000 (Rs 45,000) or  less:  the 
price  of a standard multimedia PC in India today. We  will  then 
have  ``relationships'' with ``automated personalities''. We  can 
talk to them, learn from them and exchange senses like touch  and 
smell, with them. 

-  In  another  10 years, by 2030 or so,  machines  will  develop 
human-like  ``consciousness''  and a PC can  simulate  the  brain 
power of 1000 human minds. 

- By the end of the 21st century, one computer will have  billion 
times greater computing capacity than all humans on earth.

In  other  words,  the century we have just entered  will  see  a 
blurring  of  the  distinction  between  Man  and  Machine.   And 
significantly,  this is not the result of an alien  invasion;  it 
will  emerge from within our own human civilization, by  our  own 
effort. 

If Kurzweil's predictions seem far fetched, consider his argument 
that  we  are  firmly set on the road which  will  see  all  this 
happen:

Already,  we have neural implants - tiny processors  which  mimic  
the  human nerve cell or neuron - to help reduce the  effects  of 
Parkinson's Disease and multiple sclerosis; chochlear implants to 
restore  hearing to the aurally challenged.... And any  day  now, 
will come, a retina implant, powered by solar cells and connected 
to  the optic nerve to restore sight to the blind, by using  tiny 
TV cameras embedded in special spectacles. 

Kurzweil  argues  that by 2020 such neural implants will  not  be 
just  for the sick or disabled - but for most of us, as tools  to 
enhance  our sensory experience. And one of these  implants  will 
even plug us directly to the Internet. ``Look Ma, no PC!''

Biological building blocks

Scientists  have  agreed, that the computers of the  near  future 
which  aim  to  mimic  the  human mind,  will  be  built  out  of 
biological,  rather  than silicon, building blocks. Some  of  the 
first  steps  towards this goal are already being  taken.  A  few 
weeks  ago, two biomedical engineers claimed to have created  the 
first  superhuman speech recognition system,  using  breakthrough 
neural technology. Researchers, Theodore Berger and Jim-Shih Liaw 
of the University of Southern California's Laboratory for  Neural 
Dynamics,  say their Independent Speech Recognition System  (SRS) 
is better than humans at recognising spoken speech. 

They  used  artificial neural nets -  which  simulate  biological 
nervous  systems,  and unlike normal computer  software  are  not 
programmed. Rather, they are ``trained'' to associate patterns of 
inputs  with certain outputs. The USC system consists of just  11 
neurons  and  30  links  and was trained  with  12  words  and  8 
speakers.  But  its  developers feel, that if  scaled  up,  their 
network  could be a dramatic improvement over today's  off-  the- 
shelf speech recognition software.

'Thinking machines'

Once the basic neural network computer system is put together, it 
could  then  be trained to display what is  known  as  ``emergent 
behaviour'' - i.e. to act smarter than what its individual  parts 
are  capable  of. Such ``thinking machines''  were  the  ultimate 
goals  of  AI workers from the 1960s. But their  approach,  using 
large,  conventional, number-crunching machines based  on  binary 
logic, excelled only at specific tasks.

IBM  could  build a ``Big Blue'' RS/6000 computer -  a  massively 
parallel  machine  - that could finally beat Gary Kasparov  in  a 
chess  game,  because  its only task was to  search  50  to  1000 
billion chess positions in under 3 minutes.

Today's frontline intelligent-machine researchers, tend to  pooh- 
pooh  such  achievements as irrelevant to their long  term  aims. 
Rather, at places like the AI Lab of the Massachusetts  Institute 
of Technology (MIT), they are working on robots that can interact 
with  humans through language, gesture, posture and expression  - 
and hope that by manipulating the DNA of live cells and trying to  
merge  such  biological  processes  with  computers,  they   will 
succeed.

However, this is an area still enmeshed in controversy  regarding 
ethics. The famous Human Genome Project set out to map in  detail 
all   DNA  associated  with  humans.  But  what  are  the   moral 
implications    of    our   ability   to    manipulate    genetic 
characteristics? If we create a computer equipped to tinker  with 
such elements, will we have created a Frankenstein's monster?

Wearable computers

In  a purely physical sense, merging men and machines is  already 
being  achieved  -  through  ``wearable  computers''  -   totally 
portable  computers  which can be worn like  a  belt,  programmed 
using a wrist key pad and accessed by a display which appears  on 
one's  spectacles. Presently a pricey niche market consisting  of 
field  maintenance  staff  or  doctors  on  the  move,   wearable 
computers are poised to become affordable items of mass usage  at 
least  in  this  decade.  Already,  one  can  buy   ready-to-wear 
computers based on a Linux or Windows Operating System for little 
more than the cost of an equivalent laptop system. Dr Steven Mann 
of the University of Toronto, a wearable PC pioneer, goes  around 
wearing  a  pair of wrap-around dark glasses, which double  as  a 
monitor  and a tiny Webcam. He records the pictures he  sees  and 
directly posts them on his website using the Internet server that 
runs  off  the  hardware strapped to his  torso-  web  authoring, 
literally,  on the hoof. ABC TV reports that he is working on  an 
undershirt  or vest with 64 embedded processors which would  turn 
the  wearer into a massively parallel supercomputer! And the  day 
is  not  far off when the human body will provide all  the  power 
source you need.

A  body  in motion, IBM discovered a few years ago,  is  a  small 
dynamo,  generating a few hundred milliwatts of energy which  can 
be tapped, stored and used to power the wearable computer.

By  then hopefully, we will be nearer to the time  ``When  Things 
Start To Think''. That is the title of another controversial book 
of  1999, by Neil Gershenfeld, presently Director of MIT's  Media 
Lab.

The  author  suggests a near future when  ``the  medical  cabinet 
could monitor medical consumption, and could be connected to  the 
pharmacy  to  order  refills; the toilet  could  perform  routine 
chemical analyses, and could be connected to the doctor to report 
aberrations''.  In tomorrow's world of Gershenfeld, a desktop  PC 
on  a  desktop  is a limitation of its  potential.  We  would  be 
surrounded  by  smart devices - all computers - till  we  can  no 
longer  tell what input is human and what comes from a  computer. 
That  voice  at the end of the telephone that helps  you  book  a 
train  or  plane  ticket - is it a real person or  a  very  smart 
computer? we won't know and won't care. 

In  the early days of the new millennium, the first  applications  
and  devices along the road to an intelligent machine have  begun 
to appear. 

The high tech toilet is no longer a novelty -- at least in Japan. 
For  about $ 4000, you can order the Toto ``NeoRest'',  a  toilet 
featuring a microprocessor controlled seat warmer, automatic  lid 
opener, deodorizer, water sprays and blow dryer. 

The  new  model  to  come  will  do  precisely  what  Gershenfeld 
suggests:  analyse  the urine sample for blood sugar and  send  a 
report to the doctor by an attached modem.

At the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas on January 5, 
the  world's largest expo for ``personal technology'', they  were 
demonstrating  the  ``Visteon'' Car Computer  using  an  advanced 
voice technology system. Powered by a Pentium chip and a  Windows 
CE  operating system, the unit fitted on the dashboard, could  be 
addressed by voice to access Internet, read back email and obtain 
advice on navigation and weather conditions.

``Thanks, Visteon, that's it for today. Let's head for home!''.

* * *

`The human cell is a computer'

AN ISRAELI scientist has suggested that within two decades, every 
cell  in  the  human body could be programmed to  act  like  tiny 
biological  computers.Simple  molecular building  blocks  -  like 
amino  acid -could be trained to look out for  hostile  bacteria, 
diagnose   imminent  disease  and  release  tiny  quantities   of 
antibiotic to fight it.

Reuters, quoted from the latest issue of New Scientist where Ehud 
Shapiro,  a  computer  scientist  at  the  Weizman  Institute  of 
Science, in Rehovat, Israel, makes his suggestion.

Shapiro  invokes a principle, ``The Universal  Turing  Machine'', 
first  enunciated  by the British scientist  Alan  Turing,  sixty 
years ago. 

Turing's machine, an abstract concept,never realised in hardware, 
was  supposed  to  read  a mathematical  problem  and  perform  a 
specific action in response to every line reasoning. 

On the same analogy, says Shapiro, the human biological  building 
block can be taught to ``read'' a chemical programme contained in 
a specific molecule and to compute an answer by creating  another 
molecule. 

This is not much different from how living cells create  proteins 
according to their DNA. 

This development could occur as early as 20 years from now -  and 
as late as 50 - Shapiro adds and suggests that if the cell is not  
able  to  sort  out the problem it could ring an  alarm  by,  for 
example, colouring the urine. 

New  Scientist which reports Shapiro's prophecy, feels  there  is 
still much skepticism about it in the scientific community.

Meanwhile,  at  the  Indian  Science  Congress,  which  was  held 
recently  in Pune, noted Indian physicist, Dr ECG Sudarshan,  now 
with  Texas  University, said the ultimate  number  cruncher  and 
super  computer of the twenty first century would be a  ``quantum 
computer''. 

It would be superior to the human brain and would solve the  most 
complicated   mathematical  problems  -  like   Fermat's   ``Last 
Theorem'', he added.

A quantum computer would not be limited to the ones and zeros  of 
conventional digital computing but would handle a million or more 
variables. 

Dr  Sudarshan  believes  that early  prototypes  of  the  quantum 
computer would be realised within this decade.
