
Joseph Swan (1828-1914): A determined experimenter 


Trained as a chemist, Swan's scientific activities spanned a wide 
range:  from incandescent electric lamp,  electroplating  methods 
and  electrolytic cells to photographic processing. Many  of  his 
inventions  were  of  practical use. He took  out  more  than  70 
patents. He was elected F.R.S. in 1894 and knighted in 1904.

JOSEPH SWAN was born on October 31, 1828 in Sunderland (England). 
During  his  childhood, his parents permitted him to  roam  about 
Sunderland  which  developed in him a fascination  for  the  busy 
industries that he saw.

Swan  received meagre education: he attended a `dame school'  run 
by  three old ladies and from there proceeded to a  large  school 
under  the  direction  of a Scottish Minister.  He  then  started 
apprenticeship  in  a  firm  of druggists,  which  he  could  not 
complete  due to the death of both partners. He then  joined  the 
chemical  firm  run by his brother-in-law, John  Mawson.  He  was 
fascinated by science and engineering inventions.

One such lecture by W.E. Staite in 1845 awakened his interest  in 
electric lighting. He began making filaments by cutting strips of 
cardboard and baking them at high temperature to produce a carbon 
fibre - often employing exotic recipes such as cooking with syrup 
of tar!

In 1860, Swan developed a primitive electric lamp that utilised a 
filament  of  carbonised paper in an evacuated  glass  bulb.  The 
commercial  success of the lamps depended on the production of  a 
high degree of vacuum and of sufficient strength for the bulbs to 
be transported without damage. The problem was solved by Swan.

Through  a  newspaper  advertisement, Swan came to  know  of  the 
vacuum  pump invented by the German chemist Hermann Sprengal  and 
also  Charles  Stearn  who was familiar  with  the  technique  of 
producing vacuum using Sprengel pump. Swan and Stearn found  that 
if,  after producing the best possible vacuum, a  strong  current 
was  passed  to make the filament brightly, and if the  bulb  was 
further evacuated, a fairly durable incandescent lamp was the end 
product.

Swan  patented  a  process  in  which  nitrocellulose  (made   by 
nitrating  cotton)  was  extruded  through a  fine  die  to  form 
artificial  fibre.  This also yielded a  commercial  process  for 
synthetic fibre which the textile industry exploited. 

Thomas  Edison  (1847-1931), the pioneer  in  electric  lighting, 
developed an electric lamp on a principle similar to that of Swan 
and had already field a patent. So he started taking legal action 
against  Swan but the case was dismissed. In 1880,  after  twenty 
years,  both Edison and Swan produced a practical electric  bulb. 
The Edison Swan Electric Light Company was born in 1883. 

In the 1880's electricity had been successfully used for lighting 
but  with arc lamps, which were powered by individual  generators 
on the premises. No technique of sub-dividing electric light into 
small  units  had  been devised.  The  commercial  production  of 
electric bulb in different sizes and in large numbers provided  a 
great  stimulus  to the utilisation of electric power,  first  in 
public   buildings,  private  residences  and  then   in   shops, 
factories,  offices.  Swan  was  not  content  with  reaping  the 
financial rewards of his invitation.

Swan  produced a miner's electric safety lamp; this,  though  far 
too  costly  at that time, led to the production  of  the  modern 
miner's  lamp. As a by-product, he landed on a new lead  battery, 
which would not spill acid.

While  working in the chemical firm of his  brother-in-law,  Swan 
displayed  his  innovative capability by  producing  photographic 
chemicals.  He  developed  keen  interest  in  the   photographic 
process, making an experimental study of the various methods.  He 
developed  in  1871 a new method of drying the  wet  photographic 
plates.  In 1879, he invented the bromide printing  paper,  which 
laid the foundation for modern photography.

Swan held high offices in a number of professional societies.  He 
received  medals  from the Royal Society, London  and  the  Royal 
Photographic  Society.  He died in Warbingham, at the age  of  85 
(May 27, 1814).

R. Parthasarathy
