
Embryos and evolution 


A  HUNDRED  years ago, it was commonly thought that  the  growing 
human embryo passed through all its previous stages in evolution. 
From  the  single cell, to a simple multicellular  creature,  and 
then through stages corresponding to a fish, a lizard, a mouse, a 
monkey and then a human.

This  idea was first suggested by German biologist Ernst  Haeckel 
(1834-1919),  an  early supporter of Charles Darwin's  theory  of 
evolution.  Haeckel  coined the phrase  ``ontogeny  recapitulates 
phylogeny'',   meaning   that  development  and   growth   repeat 
evolutionary history. He called this the bio-genetic law, and the 
idea became popularly known as recapitulation.

In fact, Haeckel's strict law was soon shown to be incorrect. For 
instance, the early human embryo never has functioning gills like 
a  fish, and never passes through stages that look like an  adult 
reptile  or  monkey. Furthermore, it was becoming  apparent  that 
some   species  had  passed  through  fewer  stages  than   their 
ancestors, not more.

After  the concept of recapitulation had fallen from  grace,  the 
British  marine biologist Walter Garstang suggested in the  1920s 
that  the  opposite  process to recapitulation,  what  he  called 
paedomorphosis  (literally ``child shape'') might be  a  powerful 
process in evolution.

Rather than building a new structure on top of the adult form  of 
the  ancestor,  the  new  generation  of  adults  could  preserve 
features  which  had  previously  disappeared  after   childhood. 
Garstrang  argued,  for  instance, that  vertebrates  might  have 
arisen  by  paedomorphosis from a sea  squirt  (tunicate)  larva. 
These  tadpole-like  larval forms have a number  of  features  in 
common with adult vertebrates.

While  Haeckel  had  suggested that organisms  speeded  up  their 
development through previous evolutionary stages, or added stages 
on, Garstang was suggesting that they could also be slowed  down, 
or later stages lost.

This  variation  in  the timing of the  apperance  of  particular 
features in later generations, is nowadays known as  heterochrony 
(literally    ``different   timing'').   The    implication    of 
heterochrony,  if  it  really  does  explain  one  way  in  which 
evolution  can work, is that Haeckel's recapitulation ideas  were 
at least partly true.

And   the  process  Haeckel  was  describing  is  now  known   as 
peramorphosis (literally ``beyond shape'').

The concept of heterochrony can be extremely helpful in trying to 
understand many evolutionary processes. Garstang used it to  help  
explain  the origin of a major lineage, the  vertebrates.  Others 
have used it to explain the evolution of other major groups, like 
insects, amphibians, birds, and whales. But changes in the timing 
of  growth  patterns can also help to  explain  other  biological 
phenomena.  Subtle  changes  in a population in time  or  over  a 
geographical  range,  caused  by changin growth  rates  or  their 
duration  have  been documented in many fossil  groups,  such  as 
trilobites,  ammonites  and  sea  urchins,  producing   long-term 
evolutionary trends.

Heterochronic   adaptations  to  changed  environments   can   be 
artificially induced too. For instance, if caterpillars are fed a 
tougher grass than usual, the mandibles enlarge, resulting in the 
``evolution  of  caterpillars  with  larger  heads.   Differences 
between  the sexes are often due to variations in the  time  that 
sexual maturity is reached and growth stops.

Many   of  the  secondary  sexual  characteristics   in   humans, 
especially body size and proportion, are due to the earlier  onet 
of sexual maturity in females. It is even more dramatic in angler 
fish, where the 15 cm male grows much less than the female,  ends 
up looking like a juvenile and attaches itself to the head of the 
metre-long female!

Even  the evolution of behaviour may sometimes have  its  origins 
heterochrony.  The  bird song in some species  of  reed  warblers 
develops   more  slowly  than  in  others,  so  that  they   sing 
perpetually like juveniles.

The  idea that there is an ancient common pattern in  multicelled 
organisms  has  recently  received  some  confirmation  with  the 
discovery of Hox genes. These genes seem to control  development, 
especially in the early embryo, and they are very similar in  all 
living  multicellular  organisms. Researchers are now  trying  to 
understand  how other genetic changes can influence the  relative 
rates  of  growth  of different organs, and  thus  forge  a  link 
between genetics on one side, and natural selection on the other.

Baby face

Superbrain

Heterochrony has been documented in a wide range of animals, from 
dinosaurs to dodos. Many long-term trends in dinosaur  evolution, 
such as the growth of horns in ceratopsians, and the increase  in 
body  and  head size in tyrannosaurids, are due to  increases  in 
growth rates and duration.

Dodos are basically giant, flightless pigeons. Here, an  increase 
in  body size was traded for a decrease in wing size and loss  of 
flight  - an adaptation that clearly backfired after  humans  and 
their pets turned up on the dodo's home of Mauritius.

We  can look in more detail at the effects of  heterochrony  with 
the  well-studied  example of human  evolution.  Growing  animals  
don't just get bigger, they also change shape. The rate of change 
in  shape is particularly dramatic during embryonic  development, 
before declining during childhood and adolescence. The head of  a 
newborn  human  baby is much larger relative to the size  of  its 
body  and  its limbs, than it is in adulthood. In the  womb,  the 
brain  grows at a much faster rate than other parts of the  body. 
It is later, during childhood, that the limbs and trunk catch up, 
while the skull changes to a lesser degree than before.

At  birth the brain is 25 per cent of its adult volume. It  takes 
another  five  years to reach 90 per cent, then  a  further  five 
years to get to 95 per cent. Changing rates or periods of  growth 
can therefore dramatically affect what the adult looks like.

If  human  evolution had relied only on the slowing down  of  the 
developmental clock, then as grown-ups we would look exactly like 
the  children  of  early generations. This  would  be  a  totally 
paedomorphic  effect. But if the developmental clock  had  always 
ticked   faster,  or  for  longer,  we  would  be  the   ultimate 
peramorphic super-ape.

Untill   recently,   the  few  anthropologists   and   biologists 
interested  in  heterochrony  in human  evolution  supposed  that 
paedomorphosis  was the most important effect. About  10  million 
years ago, adult human ancestors probably looked like the apes of 
today.

If so, the faces of their babies would have looked very different 
from  those  of  their parents. A tiny, newborn  chimp  has  big, 
doleful  eyes and a delicate face nestling beneath  a  relatively 
big  skill.  But its parents has a protuberant face  and  massive 
jaws hung beneath a relatively small skull.

Superficially,  modern humans resemble baby chimps  more  closely 
than  adult chimps. Like them, we have a relatively large  skull, 
and  a  small face and jaws. Although it was  originally  thought 
that we simply preserved our ancient childhood looks into  modern 
adulthood, the actual process has involved a speeding up of brain 
and skull growth, but a slowing of jaw growth.

If  you  take  the human skull on its own, and  compare  it  with 
ancestral  forms, there has been far greater development  -  this 
reature  is peramorphic. On the other hand, the jaw went  in  the 
opposite  direction, skrinking by paedomorphosis. Like  dinosaurs 
and  dodos, we are a mosaic of characters - some have growh  more 
than in our ancestors, others less.

Some  anatomists  suggest  that  other  adult  human   anatomical 
features are reminiscent of juvenile apes: a general lack of body 
hair, thinner skull bones, smaller teeth, and relatively  shorter 
arms  and  otes. But probably the most important factors  in  the 
shift from ape to bipedal humans are peramorphic. There has  been 
more  than  a  doubling  of body  weight  and  height  since  the 
australopithecines  of about 4.5 million years ago, brain  volume 
has more than trebled and its complexity increased, and our  hind  
limbs have lengthened relative to the trunk.

These  changes, which have allowd us to walk upright and  develop 
conscious  thought,  memory,  intelligence and  speech,  are  not 
retentions of juvenile characters, but extensions of our  earlier 
ape-like characters.

Getting ahead

Apes change shape

We  can  also  live longer than other apes  -  beyond  70  years, 
compared to a maximum for captive chimps of about 45 years.  This 
extension  of life applies to an extension of every life stage  - 
embryonic, infant, juvenile and adult.

These  differences  have  been  discovered  by  calculating   the 
relative times of eruption of teeth, the method normally used  to 
distinguish growth stages in mammals. After birth, hominid growth 
can   be   classified   into   three   basic   phases:    infant, 
juvenile/adolescent  and adult, based on periods  before,  during 
and after eruption of permanent teeth respectively. THe timing of 
tooth  eruption is so fundamental to growth patterns that it  can 
be  used  in  living animals to  predict  accurately  other  life 
history events, such as gestation period, age at sexual  maturity 
and life span.

Analysis  of  fossil hominid teeth indicates that  growth  phases 
have  been stretched out during evolution, allowing  hominids  to 
grow  longer legs to carry their large body upright, larger  foot 
bones  to  support  a greater weight, and a  larger  brain.  Once 
again,   this   suggests  that  a   peramorphosis   rather   than 
paedomorphosis played the crucial role in hminid evolution.

Human  evolution  is also about changes in behaviour  and  social 
structure. The beauty of heterochrony is that it can also explain 
many  of  these  changes as  well.  Most  australopithecines  are 
thought  to  have  been predominantly  vegetarian,  unlike  later 
hominids, which consumed more animal material in their diet.

Rather  surprisingly, this dietary change may be related  to  the 
increase in size of the brain. Brain tissue is metabolically very 
expansive,  using  about 17 per cent of the body's  energy  while 
making  up only 2 per cent of body weight. Its growth also  needs 
complex  facts  which  are  hard to obtain  or  synthesise  on  a 
strictly vegetarian diet.

With brain volume increasing more than three times, extra  energy 
and  specialised nutrients were essential. The energy supply  may 
have come from a developmental trade-off: the brain increasing at 
the expense of the gut. This idea was suggested in 1995 by Leslie 
Aiello  of  University  College  London  and  Peter  Wheeler   of 
Liverpool  John Moores University. Compared with other  primates, 
our  guts  are only 60 per cent of the size they should  be.  Gut 
size  is strongly correlated with diet. Small guts only  function  
with  high-quality,  easily digested food such as  meat,  whereas 
large  guts  are  needed to process large  amounts  of  vegetable 
matter.

Evidence  of this gut reduction is provided by changing  skeletal 
shape  during hominid evolution. A paedomorphis reduction in  jaw 
and  tooth size accompanied this shrinking gut, as  hominids  ate 
food  that did not need endless chewing. When fire was  used  for 
cooking,  this  may have reinforced the trend to  smaller  teeth, 
because  fire partly breaks down food before it even  enters  the 
mouth.

Most   importantly,  by  extending  the  growth   period   before 
adulthood,  a larger, more complex brain has  evolved.  Branching 
growth  of  neurons occurs mainly during early  development.  The 
more  maturation  is delayed, the greater the number  of  neurons 
formed.  Compared  with all other primates,  living  or  extinct, 
modern humans have easily the greatest number of  interconnecting 
neurons,  and  a larger, more complex brain at the  end  of  each 
growth phase.

Some  humans  behaviour  cna also be considered  as  evolving  by 
heterochrony. One of the most important effects of our  stretched 
out growth has been the evolution of a longer childhood, allowing 
more time for learning complex behaviours than in other primates. 
do not develop behaviourally to the same extent as humans.  Adult 
great  apes have cognitive abilities similar to those of a  human 
child  of  two  to four years. The  cognitive  abilities  of  the 
smaller adult cebus monkey are similar to those of a two-year-old 
human   child,  because  it  passes  through  fewer   stages   of 
development.  Adult  macaques  pass through  even  fewer  stages, 
showing cognitive abilities comparable of those of a one-year-old 
child.

Using evidence from living animals and humans, Parker an Kathleen 
Gibson of the University of Texas at Houston have suggested  that 
cognitive development in adult australopithecines was  equivalent 
to  that  of 2 to 3 year-old human. In Homo habilis it  was  like 
that  of a 5 to 6-year old; in Homo erectus like a 6  to  8-year-
old; in Homo heidelbergensis and Homo neanderthalensis like a 10-
12-year-old.

It  sems,  however,  that ever-increasing brain  size  ceased  to 
become a prerequisite for further cultural development from about 
100000  years  ago.  In  fact, it  is  often  remarked  that  the 
Neanderthals,  a type of archaic human that survived until  about 
50000 years ago in Europe, possessed a slightly larger brain  (at 
about  1440  cubic centimenres) than modern  humans  (about  1400 
cubic centimetres), but an inferior stone-tool technology.

Perhaps the crucial factor was language, and many anthropologists 
belive  that  the sharing of complex knowledge in  modern  humans 
allowed  technologu to advance without the need  for  ever-larger 
brains.  It may also have been because it is not just  size  that 
matters,  but  which part of the brain are  more  developed.  Our  
complex  congnitive  abilities are due to  our  relatively  large 
neocortex. It is quite likely that this part of the brain was not 
so well developed in Neanderthals.

So, it seems that evolution is often the result of changes in the 
rate and duration of development of different body parts. And  it 
is likely that large differences between ancestor and  descendant 
can  appear with relatively minor genetic change, involving  only 
those genes that control the pattern and timing of development.

THis  is  why a single species, such as the dog, can  produce  so 
many  breeds, all of which remain genetically  compatible.  Human 
genes  are 99 per cent similar to those of chimpanzees.  But  all 
that stretching and shrinking has made an enormous difference  of 
the final result. 

- New Scientist
