
High-yielding, disease-resistant hybrid maize


By Our Agriculture Correspondent

A  HIGH-YIELDING,  disease- resistant, full-season  hybrid  maize 
(Zea  mays) has been developed by scientists at the  Agricultural 
Research  Station (ARS), Arabhavi in northern Karnataka.  It  has 
been  released  for  commercial cultivation  by  farmers  of  the 
University  of  Agricultural Sciences (UAS), Dharwad  last  year. 
Christened  DMH-2 (Dharwad Maize Hybrid-2), it is the first  ever 
single cross hybrid developed at this centre and first in  entire 
south India, according to scientists at the ARS, Arabhavi. 

A derivative of a cross between CI-4, a direct introduction  from 
CIMMYT  in  Mexico, and KDMI- 10 developed from  elite  germplasm 
collected  from  the  national  pool,  the  new  hybrid   closely 
resembles  DMH-1.  It is a full season single cross  hybrid  with 
high yield potential, according to the scientists.

Maturing  in  110-115 days, it is recommended for  growing  under 
irrigated  conditions  as  an entire full  season  crop.  It  has 
recorded  a  grain yield of 5400-5600 kg per hectare, and  a  dry 
fodder yield of 7000-7500 kg per hectare. It has registered a  20 
per cent increase in output than Deccan-103 and 8 per cent higher 
yield than DMH-1. It is fairly resistant to sorghum downy  mildew 
disease,  and also tolerant to Turcicum leaf blight. Under  field 
conditions  no serious pest problem is observed. The plants  grow 
to a height of about 170 cm, and this late variety can be  raised 
in kharif and rabi seasons. The ideal sowing time is May-June and 
September-October. A seed rate of 15 kg will be needed to cover a 
hectare. An espacement of 75 cm between rows and 20 cm within the 
rows is recommended. The nutrient dose prescribed for raising  it 
to  good yields is 150 kg nitrogen, 75 kg phosphorus and 37.5  kg 
potash per hectare.

In  terms of resistance to lodging and shattering and quality  of 
produce, it is on par with DMH-1, the existing commercial  hybrid 
maize  grown  widely in the region. Since it is  a  single  cross 
hybrid, seed production is relatively easy. Only three isolations 
are required. For seed production purposes, slight enhancement of 
female rows is recommended. 

Farmers  in the region are in need of a high  yielding,  disease- 
resistant,  full-season maize hybrid. This hybrid meets  all  the 
needs of the farmers, and growers have expressed their acceptance 
during  the conduct of farm trials, according to the  scientists. 
This was recommended for release by the Plant Scientists Group of 
UAS, Dharwad, which met in August 1998 at Raichur, and ZREAC  and 
ZREFC meeting of Zone III held in April, 1999 at RRS, Bijapur.
