
A classic portrayal


CHENNAI HAS become a play ground - literally. Almost every month, 
enthusiastic  bands  of players display their  artistic  talents, 
their act eagerly anticipated by a growing audience.

A  theatrical start to this New Year will be the British  Theatre 
Company's adaptation of Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre. The theatre 
group  that  swept  Chennaiites  a  few  years  ago  with   their 
recreation of the flood scene in Mill on the Floss is back  again 
- Shared Experience now brings to town Jane Eyre.

The  plot is the same - of plain Jane the governess,  falling  in 
love  with her employer Rochester and, thereby, stumbling on  the 
dark  secrets  in  his haunt - Thornfield  estate.  Polly  Teale, 
director  of the play, however, has gone beyond to draw  out  the 
links between Rochester's mad wife Bertha and Jane. In this post-
modern  analysis of the relationship between the two women,  Jane 
Eyre  resolves  to  deny the passionate, outspoken  side  of  her 
nature.  And  fails. When she is brought  face-to-face  with  the 
imprisoned `other woman.'

Shared  Experience  which  has been touted  as  `one  of  British 
theatre's  greatest  survivors'  believes in the  idea  of  story 
telling  in  which  the inner lives of those  on  stage  is  made 
palpably physical. 

When Helen Edmundson, the writer, and Polly Teale, signed up with 
Shared  Experience, Mike Alfreds, founder of the theatre  finally 
had  that distinctive performance style he was working for  -  `a 
genuine  and  celebratory  marriage of  physical  and  text-based 
theatre.'

Among  their famed productions are `Anna Karenina`, `Mill on  the 
Floss',  a  novel adaptation of Shakespeare's `The  Tempest'  and 
Tolstoy's epic `War and Peace'. They have performed on  platforms 
all  over  the world and carried home awards  in  recognition  of 
their talent and innovation.

While  all  of  their plays thrive on  ambiguity  and  theatrical 
expressiveness,  staging the physical manifestation of the  inner 
journey  of characters, they seem to do it better, or more  often 
with women's roles.

Shared  Experience will take the stage at the Music  Academy,  on 
January  23  and  24, with its  fast  paced,  sensual,  aesthetic 
interpretation of the nineteenth-century Bronte classic. 

The British Council and the Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
(ICCR) have come together to have Shared Experience in Chennai.

(By Ramya Kannan)
