
Man's activities linked to religion


CHENNAI, JAN. 13. Religions all over the world trace their origin 
to some source or to certain illuminaries. Hinduism, however, had 
been in existence from a period which cannot be specified. It was 
there  but ceased to thrive for a period in the middle  and  then 
re-appeared  and  spread. It is like Mother Earth  who  had  been 
there forever. A part of her was taken to make mud pots and other 
containers, and when they broke into pieces later, became part of 
the former once again. This process cannot be seen by our eyes as 
milk  that  turns  into  curd  by  the  addition  of  a  drop  of 
buttermilk. Try however you may, observe with all alertness,  yet 
the  process of change will not be visible. Thus, the  period  of 
destruction  was  due  to reasons beyond our  vision,  and  hence 
cannot be described but Hinduism was resurrected.

Another illustration is that of Sun which may be out of our sight 
for  a  time but it makes its re-appearance.  Hinduism  had  been 
surviving  since  ages.  The  ``Creator''  caused  the  birth  of 
animals,  birds, human beings and celestials. There has  been  no 
evolution  from one stage to another as claimed by  some.  Humans 
were endowed with several faculties, particularly the use of  his 
brain,  to  think  and act judiciously.  He  can  understand  and 
differentiate between what is right and wrong and good and  evil. 
He  has therefore at his disposal the power to judge. Even  among 
several  creations, only some are privileged to be born as  human 
beings,  based on the theory of action and reaction (Karma).  For 
his  pious deeds he is rewarded while he will be punished  if  he 
misbehaves.

Sri  Jayendra  Saraswathi Swami, in a  discourse,  explained  how 
every man and woman can remain devoted to God, obtain His  grace, 
and pray for his or her release from worldly bondage. While it is 
mentioned  that bathing in river Ganga can redeem a devotee  from 
sins,  this  step  is only for one who holds  to  God  with  firm 
belief.  On the other hand, can fish or animals which  remain  in 
the  river for ever, be said to get rid of their sins? It is  not 
so. Devotion can be practised by humans with sincerity.

The  grace of a  religious leader will help a devoted  person  to 
resort  to the path leading to God's world. That is why  repeated 
emphasis is laid on getting associated with preceptors and  pious 
persons,  which will enable one in getting the  impurities  being 
flushed  out  of the mind. Devotees should observe the  Rules  of 
Moral  Law, practise austerities, cultivate good thoughts,  words 
and deeds. Every act of a devotee is closely linked to  religion, 
so  as to make him proceed gradually from a lower to  the  Divine 
level.
