
The people's advocate


``Rights are not meant just for the politically marginalised  and 
persecuted, but for all.''

Ms.  Shulamith Koenig came to Chennai after  the  ``comprehensive 
victory  of  non  Governmental organisations''  at  Seattle.  The 
Executive Director and founder of the Organising Committee of the 
People's Decade of Human Rights Education, tells

R.  K.  Radhakrishnan  of her effort to lead  a  worldwide  human 
rights education advocacy - a Decade of Human Rights Education  - 
with  the  UN Human Rights Centre, the U.N. Commission  on  Human 
Rights,  Geneva and at the World Conference on Human Rights  held 
at Vienna.

THE STRUGGLE resulted in the launching of the UN Decade for Human 
Rights  Education  (1995-2004) in December 1994. Equality  is  an 
attitude;  it  is  not  meant to protect just you  or  me  in  an 
individual  sense,  but us and the society we live in,  says  Ms. 
Koenig.

``Many NGOs in Seattle were not protesting at all. We were merely 
demanding  that governments fulfil the promises they  make.  That 
they  take action on the treaties they had ratified,''  says  Ms. 
Koenig,  who led a delegation of human rights experts to the  WTO 
meeting  in  Seattle. ``Do not seek refuge under  the  clause  of 
progressive   ratification.  Because  it  does  not   mean   that 
governments  should  start implementing their treaties 10  or  15 
years  later. It says start now, not a decade later.'' The  PDHRE 
held a teach-in for the people and a debate with Trade  Ministers 
introducing  the  human  rights framework as  an  imperative  for 
economic development and trade. ``The very idea of  globalisation 
does not have a human face. It has a dollar face,'' she says. 

Dedicated   to  promoting,  facilitating  and   developing   mass 
education in human rights and democracy worldwide, Ms. Koenig has 
organised   and  conducted  consultations  and   workshops   with 
educators, human rights advocates and community leaders in  Asia, 
Africa,  Central Europe, Latin America and the Middle East.  ``In 
India,  we  have just declared Nagpur a  human  rights  sensitive 
city, after working with NGOs there,'' she says.

The  various  workshops focussed on identifying  the  needs,  for 
education in human rights and democracy in specific countries and 
regions,  developing strategies for reaching various  sectors  of 
society  with educational programmes to strengthen civil  society 
and  democracy.  ``Human  rights is not charity  and  it  is  not 
confined  to  the  narrow mandate  that  Amnesty  (International) 
focusses  on.  Rights  are meant not  just  for  the  politically 
marginalised  and persecuted, but for all. It is  something  that 
has to do with the everyday life of all of us,'' says Ms. Koenig, 
who  has  come a long way from where she began her career  -  the  
Israeli  Army;  as  an Education Officer  of  the  Negev  Palmach 
Brigade and Commander of the Jerusalem Women's Corps. 

Ms.  Koenig was in the city to deliver the keynote address  at  a 
Dalit  Liberation  Education  Trust  workshop  on  `Human  Rights 
Education in the Next Millennium.'

Born  in  Jerusalem in 1930, Shula, who graduated  with  a  B.Sc. 
degree  in  Industrial Engineering and Management  from  Columbia 
University,  New York, took many courses in various  institutions 
in  public  administration, and human rights.  She  held  various 
positions,  including  that  of  chairperson,  Citizen's   Rights 
Movement  in  Israel,  member of the  Prime  Minister's  National 
Committee  on  the  Status of Women in Israel  (1973-  1977)  and 
organised  the Washington Israeli-Palestinian  Conference  (1979) 
apart from founding Kol Koreh, an action centre for education  of 
civil liberties and democratic leadership (1978-1982).

Photo: N. Sridharan

Shulamith Koenig
