
A hallowed house of history


FOR THE last three decades, the Ice House, an abandoned structure 
on  the  Marina, had been known as Vivekanandar Illam.  And  many 
wondered  what it was all about as there was nothing whereby  one 
could  relate the monument with its name, except for a statue  of 
Swami Vivekananda nearby.

However, today, true to its name, the building, presenting a  new 
look,  houses a gallery of 150 laminated and rare photographs  of 
Swami Vivekananda, depicting the highlights of his eventful  but, 
brief life. 

Starting  with  his  early  days as  a  disciple  of  Ramakrishna 
Paramahamsa,  the gallery contains photographs taken  during  his 
visit  to the U.S. and the U.K. There are some pictures  such  as 
the   one  featuring  Swami  Vivekananda  with   his   colleagues 
immediately before the cremation of Ramakrishna (in August 1886), 
and another on the reception given to him at Calcutta in February 
1897  after  his return from the West.In addition to  the  famous 
photograph  of the Swami in a meditative pose, the gallery has  a 
picture  of  the  Swami's  palm  impression  besides  some  other 
photographs carrying his autograph.

Besides, it has two sections, on the country's cultural heritage, 
and the other, on the history of the building itself.

The first section has around 45 portraits, displaying the  stages 
of evolution of Indian civilisation till the birth of Ramakrishna 
Sri  Paramahamsa. Located in the basement, the gallery  on  ``Ice 
House'' has several photographs, including the one taken prior to 
1893.

Thanks  to the efforts of the Chennai chapter of the  Ramakrishna 
Math, the structure, which was in a state of decay till recently, 
has  been  given  a new lease of life  while  retaining  all  its 
original characteristics.

The  Math's  website (www.sriramakrishnamath.org) has a  page  on 
this historic landmark, giving an account of the significance  of 
the  building.  The  gallery is open to  the  public,  except  on 
Wednesdays between 9 a.m. and 12-30 p.m. and 3 p.m. and 6-30 p.m. 
Adults  pay  an entrance fee of Rs. 2 and children (3 to  12),  a 
rupee.

( T. Ramakrishnan)
