The owner with an enviable record 

An astonishing quirk is that MAM 's racing life began with a two- horse base and in 35 years has grown at an amazing progression to touch a four-figure mark if the 240 mares in his sprawling 250- acre Chettinad Stud Farm are roped in .
It was through Silver Jet ( P. Khade up ) that MAM got his first Classic taste , the Bangalore Colts Trial Stakes in 1965 ahead of Mr. Lucky , rather ironic coincidence that the owner of the winner was destined to be one .
Another striking example of how well , MAM could read the pulse of a horse was in his insistence on Amazing Bay being given a training regimen of his choice and his unflinching faith in chalking out an elaborate plan for Smart Chieftain the day he saw the gelding unleashing that spectacular run in the Bangalore Derby .
I recall with relish my association with trainers like Rashid Byramji , Aziz Mahmood , P. Corner , R. Alford , Karan Singh , Madhu Mangalorkar , Imtiaz Sait , Bezan Chenoy , Toddywalla , Haskell David , Gurdev Singh , Daji .
' ' ` ` I am fortunate to have had the services of some top jockeys like Willie Carson , Walter Swinburn , Hilton , Cope , Jagdish , Pandu Khade , Jim Foley , Vasanth Shinde , Pesi Shroff , Aslam Khader , Mallesh Narredu , Sateesh Narredu , Robin Corner , Jimmy Fortune , Sinclair Marshall , Lloyd Marshall , Still , Fallon , Karan Singh to name but a few' ' ` ` I remember with a tinge of pride some of these horses , Silver Jet , Fair Court , Tudor Jet , Own Beauty , Red Satin ( only one to have beaten Squanderer ) , Half A Crown , Own Opinion ( won a record number of 27 races ) , Ministerella , Star Supreme , Amazing Bay ( first Indian Derby winner in his colours ) , Forest Fantasy ( highest stake earner in the history of Indian racing ) , Star Contender , Star Haven , Exhilaration , Air Hostess , Smart Chieftan..'' .
MAM had his ups and downs and goes back to that day when Own Opinion beat Royal Tern to the Invitation Cup as his most exciting racing moment .
