
Clinton visit soon, says Summers


By Alok Mukherjee

NEW   DELHI,  JAN.  18.  The  visiting  United  States   Treasury 
Secretary, Mr Lawrence H. Summers, today confirmed that the U. S. 
President,  Mr.  Bill Clinton, would be visiting  India  ``sooner 
than later,'' but side- stepped all queries on a possible lifting 
of  sanctions  imposed against India after  the  Pokhran  nuclear 
tests in May 1998.

 Asked specifically whether it was normal for the U. S. President 
to visit a country which was under sanctions imposed by the U. S. 
itself, Mr. Summers simply said, ``it is normal for the President 
to  visit  a  country  with  which  United  States  has  friendly 
relations  and where he feels that relations can improve  in  the 
future.''

Responding  to  a query on sanctions, Mr. Summers said  ``I  have 
nothing for you on that issue. 

The  lifting  of  sanctions requires  careful  judgment  and  the 
Treasury  Department  is not involved in that. But the  issue  of 
sanctions continues to be a matter of concern for the  Indians,'' 
he conceded. Mr. Summers said he had delivered a letter from  Mr. 
Clinton  to the Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee,  saying 
that he was `looking forward to visiting India.'' Mr. Clinton had 
also made it clear that issues concerning economic potential were 
very important to him, Mr Summers said and added that ``when  the 
President  comes  here,  he  will  be  looking  forward  and  not 
backwards.''

 Mr  Summers,  however, declined to give specific  dates  of  the 
visit,  saying he would leave it to the White House  to  announce 
that.  The  issue of sanctions was raised by  the  Union  Finance 
Minister,  Mr.  Yashwant Sinha, too during his meeting  with  Mr. 
Summers.  Mr. Sinha specifically stressed the need to  prune  the 
list of entities on which bilateral interaction was restricted. 

He also requested Mr. Summers to lift the sanctions on lending by 
financial  institutions  and to resume the  facility  of  General 
System  of Preferences which had been extended to Indian  exports 
in the past.

 Other  issues  of  disagreement  between  India  and  the  U.S., 
especially about the Washington's insistence on including  labour 
standards  in  the  World  Trade  Organisation,  figured  in  the 
separate  discussions that Mr Summers had with Mr.  Vajpayee  and 
Mr. Sinha. 

Mr. Summers said the discussions ``helped in better understanding 
of each others position'' and the objective of his visit was  not 
to  reach any conclusions on contentious issues. ``My visit  here  
is  aimed at building better relations between the two  countries 
and to create conditions for the President's visit.'' 

The issue of phasing out quantitative restrictions (QRs) did  not 
figure specifically during the discussions with Mr. Sinha. 

He  said  that  Pakistan  did  not  figure  at  all  during   the 
discussions here but added that ``I know it is an important issue 
and must have figured in the talks between Mr. Jaswant Singh  and 
Mr. Strobe Talbott.''
