
Agreement on seat adjustment eludes NDA


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 18. The Bharatiya Janata Party's Central Election 
Committee,  at its meeting here today, was unable to take up  the 
task  of declaring its candidates for the assembly polls  in  the 
absence of final seat adjustment with any of its allies. 

It  is  now scheduled to meet again tomorrow  afternoon  when  it 
hopes to achieve some progress in its talks with the allies - the 
Samata  Party  and the Janata Dal (United) in Bihar,  the  Indian 
National Lok Dal in Haryana and the Biju Janata Dal in Orissa.

The  Prime Minister, Mr. Vajpayee, and the Union  Home  Minister, 
Mr.  Advani, were present throughout the meeting, chaired by  the 
party  president, Mr. Kushabhau Thakre. Apparently,  the  meeting 
discussed various points for the party's manifestos in the States 
and  election  issues,  and the State  leaders  reported  to  the 
meeting the progress of talks with the allies.

With  the process of nominations on in Bihar for the first  phase 
covering  108 seats, Mr. Vajpayee may have to intervene and  talk 
directly  to  the  Samata and JD(U) leaders if  matters  are  not 
sorted out in a day or two. 

However, even as the talks seemed to have got bogged down on  the 
question  of number of seats to be contested by each partner,  an 
agreement  has been hammered out on some basic points related  to 
the Bihar campaign. Both the BJP and the JD(U) confirmed that the 
allies  would  contest  the  elections  in  Bihar  on  a   common 
manifesto, and have a joint campaign under a joint leadership. 

Mr.  Raghupathy of the JD(U) and Mr. Sushil Modi of the BJP  said 
that  there was a clear understanding among all the  allies  that 
the  basic  aim  was  to  form an  NDA  government  in  Bihar  by 
``defeating the jungle raj of the Rashtriya Janata Dal.''

It  was  clear that the parties had decided not to get  into  the 
contentious issue of chief ministerial candidate which could only 
accentuate the existing differences. They, therefore,  maintained 
that the issue would be decided after the election results.

The  big  problem  before the parties in Bihar is  that  all  the 
contenders  have come to the negotiating table  with  exaggerated 
claims  and they have not been able to work out any  satisfactory 
formula  acceptable  to all. Mr. Sushil Modi went  on  record  to 
state that the BJP had prepared a panel of its candidates for 245 
seats,  and it had a ``natural'' claim on at least 200.  However, 
he was quick to add that the actual figure would be negotiated on 
the table. 

The Samata Party is understood to have given a ``list'' of  about  
130  seats  on  the  basis of its performance  in  the  past  few 
elections.  The  BJP said that the JD(U) has  signalled  that  it 
wants to contest the ``same number'' of seats as the Samata,  and 
the  Bihar  people's Party of Mr. Anand Mohan Singh has  given  a 
list  of  nearly 40 seats. ``We could satisfy all  if  the  Bihar 
assembly  had  500  seats  instead  of  a  total  of  324,''  Mr. 
K.N.Govindacharya, BJP general secretary, said.

In Haryana, the BJP has virtually come across a stumbling  block, 
in that Mr. Om Prakash Chautala is willing to leave only 20 to 25 
seats  in an assembly of 90. The BJP State unit is understood  to 
have told the central leadership that it would prefer to ``go  it 
alone,''  than  give  in to Mr Chautala.  They  have  also  begun 
talking  about Mr. Chautala as being an ``unreliable  ally.''  It 
seems  that the BJP may now ask Mr. Govindacharya to talk to  Mr. 
Chautala to sort matters out.

In Orissa the BJP is again facing a problem, with the BJD willing 
to  accommodate  it as a junior partner. Mr. Juel  Oram,  Cabinet 
Minister  and former BJP president of the State unit,  said  that 
his  party would like to contest 50 per cent of the seats  in  an 
assembly of 147.
