
Militants will find it hot in J&K; 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  18.  The  Vajpayee  Government's   ``offensive 
strategy'' to tackle cross-border terrorism in Jammu and  Kashmir 
has  turned the focus on 49 newly-carved sectors in the  Counter-
Insurgency (CI) grid and making them self-sufficient. 

The  ``pro-active'' strategy, announced last night after a  high-
level  meeting  chaired by the Prime Minister, however,  has  not 
revealed  any  new element in deployment  of  additional  forces, 
strengthening   of   the  intelligence   network   and   fighting 
militancy.

According to top officials of the Home Ministry who were involved 
in evolving the action plan in association with Defence  Ministry 
officials,  a majority of the 49 CI sectors can be  described  as 
``hyper-sensitive''.  All CI sectors will be  self-sufficient  in 
terms of information and operations. 

While  the ``hyper-sensitive'' sectors will be under the  control 
of  the Army, the Central para-military forces will have  control 
of   other  sectors.  All  the  sectors  will  be  linked  by   a 
sophisticated  communication  network and  the  sector  commander 
given full authority and made accountable for the CI operations. 

Senior officials said the ``pro-active'' approach would not allow 
the  militants  to escape irrespective of the  consequences.  (As 
part of the move to flush out the militants, ``if we have to blow 
up  even our own buildings, we would do so as we don't  want  the 
militants to go back alive,'' PTI reported quoting the  sources.) 
In  the  post-Kargil scenario, particularly  after  the  military 
regime  took over in Pakistan, the attacks became more  desperate 
and  were  launched deep inside the areas held  by  the  security 
forces   in  Badamibagh,  Bandipur,  Handwara,   the   Government 
Secretariat in Srinagar and Jammu. 

According  to  the sources, as against over  6,800  incidents  of 
terrorist  violence  each year during 1994 and 1995,  the  number 
came down to less than 3,000 in 1998 and 1999. The sources  cited 
the  increased  flow  of domestic tourists to the  Valley  as  an 
indicator  of  things turning around during 1998 and  1999.  From 
just 322 tourists in 1995, the number rose to 99,636 in 1998  and 
to over 1,72,000 last year. 

The sources claimed that popular support to terrorist  activities 
had  declined  over the past three years. As against  85  foreign 
mercenaries  killed in 1995, as many as 319 were killed  in  1998 
and  in  the  first  10 months of last  year  about  260  foreign 
mercenaries were killed in the CI operations. 

In  the  post-Kargil  phase, militants  and  foreign  mercenaries  
infiltrated from across the border, while the troops were engaged 
in firing along the LoC. The sources said the mercenaries  headed 
for areas which they found were less attended to by the  security 
forces.  As ``suicide squads'' or ``fidayen'' targeted  army  and 
para-military camps, it was obvious that the militants were  bent 
on demoralising the security forces. 

Eleven  attacks  by ``suicide squads'' took place  in  the  post-
Kargil  phase  in  the Valley. But  the  militants  were  feeling 
``demoralised.'' All the militants of the suicide squads had been 
eliminated by the security forces. ``This kind of operation  will 
die its own death,'' the sources said. 

In the Valley, nearly 3,500 militants were operating, of whom  80 
per  cent  were mercenaries from Afghanistan,  Sudan,  Yemen  and 
Saudi Arabia.
