
Strike hits work in ports


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  18. Operations at 11 major  ports  across  the 
country have been affected as the port and dock workers  resorted 
to  an  indefinite strike as scheduled at midnight on  Monday  in 
response  to the joint call given by five federations.  They  are 
demanding a wage revision.

The  strike,  which became inevitable after the  failure  of  the 
talks  between the Union Surface Transport Minister, Mr.  Rajnath 
Singh, and the federations' representatives here, was said to  be 
by and large peaceful. However, at the Calcutta port the agitated 
workers  were  lathicharged,  it  was  alleged.  The   Government 
confirmed  that  there was a mild use of force when  the  workers 
obstructed officials from entering the port.

The Centre today put into operation a contingency plan. The Navy, 
the Coast Guard and the Territorial Army are moving in to  assist 
the  port  authorities  for  loading  and  unloading  operations. 
Contingents  of naval officers and sailors have been deployed  at 
all the major ports for manning the essential services.

The  workers claimed that the strike was not only successful  but 
also  complete and that the ports operations had been  paralysed. 
The All-India Port and Dock Workers Union general secretary,  Mr. 
Anthony  Pillai, whose federation has put forth a common  charter 
of  demands, said that ``according to information available  with 
us,  the  strike is 100 per cent successful. The talks  with  the 
Government  broke  down because the Minister was not  willing  to 
give a written assurance to satisfy our demands''. 

The most contentious of the demands relate to the period of  wage 
settlement.  The five federations spearheading the agitation  are 
insisting  on a revision and wage settlement every five years  as 
was the case earlier. The other two major demands pertain to  the 
rate of House Rent Allowance and the date from which the HRA  and 
City Compensatory Allowance would be payable.

Mr.  Rajnath Singh admitted that the ports work had been hit  but 
would  not say to what extent. It would take some time before  an 
assessment could be made.

Ironically, addressing his first press conference as the  Central 
Minister,   Mr.   Rajnath  Singh  regretted   that   the   labour 
representatives  who were assured of a sympathetic  consideration 
of  the demands, had walked out of the talks with officials  even 
without getting back to him. He appealed to them to return to the 
table.

Asserting that it was a challenge which ``we have accepted'',  he 
said  the  situation  would be dealt  with  effectively.  Various  
departments  and agencies had already created buffer stocks.  The 
Minister  refused  to comment when asked if he would  invoke  the 
Essential Service Maintenance Act to deal with the strike.

The  Federation of Indian Export Organisations urged the  workers 
to  call off the strike in the national and their  own  interest. 
The  Centre  of  Indian Trade Union congratulated  them  for  the 
``successful  strike''  and  condemned  the  Calcutta   incident, 
claiming  that 29 employees suffered injuries in the  lathicharge 
by the CISF.
