
No policy innovation in J&K; strategy


By Harish Khare

NEW DELHI, JAN.18. The Prime Minister-led review of the  security 
scenario   in  Jammu  and  Kashmir  has  expectedly  led   to   a 
reaffirmation of the Vajpayee Government's resolve to defeat  the 
``proxy war'', unleashed and sustained by Pakistan. The stress on 
counter-insurgency measures, to the total exclusion of  political 
solution and political ideas, is the most conspicuous outcome  of 
the review.

That  the  Prime Minister himself should have presided  over  the 
review  is  itself revealing. It was with much fanfare  that  the 
stewardship of the Jammu and Kashmir affairs was restored to  the 
Home  Ministry.  That the Jammu and Kashmir review,  first  since 
November 18, 1999, should have taken place at 7, Race Course Road 
clearly  indicates a realisation that Mr. Advani has not  exactly 
succeeded in getting the better of the situation.

In  the  event the January 17 review did not produce  any  policy 
innovation.  The  Army leadership did not have its way,  and  the 
Chief  Minister,  Dr. Farooq Abdullah, will continue  to  preside 
over  the ``unified command'' mechanism. On his part,  the  Chief 
Minister  played  out his ``helplessness'' act  rather  well;  he 
simply told the Prime Minister and his colleagues: ``Give me more 
funds  if  you want me to deliver''. And, Mr.  Vajpayee  and  his 
colleagues  had  no  choice but to agree  to  provide  the  State 
Government  with  adequate funds to  meet  the  ``developmental'' 
needs and the demands of the Government employees.

The problem for the ruling coalition at the Centre is that it has 
allowed itself to be so unseemingly and so inextricably bracketed 
with  the  National  Conference regime; and, to  the  extent  Dr. 
Farooq Abdullah is seen as not commanding popular acceptance, New 
Delhi is seen siding with an unpopular regime against the  people 
of Kashmir. 

The  utter dependence upon Dr. Abdullah has  drastically  reduced 
the Central Government's options; the Centre has not been able to 
expand the democratic political space in the Valley.  Individuals 
and  forces who are pro-India but do not necessarily  believe  in 
the Abdullah dynasty find themselves totally marginalised in  the 
Kashmiri  schemes of things. One major argument throughout  1995-
96,   it   will  be  recalled,  in  favour  of   restoration   of 
``democratic''  rule was that an elected Government  in  Srinagar 
would  provide  a  buffer between New  Delhi  and  the  alienated 
masses. That strategic purpose stands negated. 

And  because  New Delhi is seen as hostile to the  non-  National 
Conference  political voices, the anti-Abdullah and anti-  Centre 
sentiments  naturally gets channelised by the All Party  Hurriyat 
Conference.  Had  the central leadership in the  last  two  years  
displayed  political  imagination, the democratic  space  in  the 
Valley  could have expanded and the doubtful claims  of  Hurriyat 
leadership would have been exposed.

Then,  there is the other side to this  political  unimagination. 
The   accent  on  more  battalions,   counter-insurgency   units, 
additional  manpower,  etc. betrays lack  of  strategic  clarity. 
While these macho noises help reassure the domestic constituency, 
all  this  din about ``extra security  measures''  help  Pakistan 
sustain  the  notion internationally that ``Kashmir''  was  at  a 
flash-point,  and that the international community  better  force 
New Delhi to enter into a dialogue. 

Moreover,  the  ``pro-active'', offensive strategy is  flawed  on 
another  count: it is not intended to make a distinction  between 
the foreign mercenary and the local militant. Any blurring of the 
distinction  could  help generate for  the  militants  indigenous 
support and sympathy. 

But,  above  all, the January 17 review sends out  signals  of  a 
leadership  that  has  run  out of ideas.  Having  cranked  up  a 
militant mood during the Kargil conflict, the Vajpayee Government 
is now caught in its own rhetoric.
