
Firm up look-east policy, Singapore tells India


By Atul Aneja

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 18. Singapore today prompted India to  reinforce 
its  ``look-east  policy'' even as the two  countries  sought  to 
expand their economic linkages and discussed ways to galvanise  a 
global campaign against international terrorism.

``I  want  India  to  look towards  South-East  Asia,  ASEAN  and 
Singapore.  I know India places importance to relations with  the 
U.S.  and  Europe,'' the Singapore Prime Minister, Mr.  Goh  Chok 
Tong, said soon after he was accorded a ceremonial welcome in the 
forecourt of the Rashtrapati Bhavan this morning.

Mr.  Goh, who is on six-day trip to India, also sought  a  larger 
participation  of  Indian experts in  Information  Technology  in 
Singapore.  ``India is losing some people to the  Silicon  Valley 
and I hope you would lose some to Singapore,'' he said.

Mr.  Goh acknowledged that economic interaction between  the  two 
countries  had  slowed  down of late, but attributed  it  to  the 
South-East Asian economic meltdown. ``Our relations are very good 
but unfortunately because of the recent economic crisis in  Asia, 
our  contacts  were  slowed down and I  am,  therefore,  here  to 
strengthen  our ties,'' he said. Not surprisingly, Mr. Goh is  in 
India with a 20-member business delegation. 

India  had  great  potential, he said and  praised  the  ``second 
generation  of  economic  reforms''  initiated  by  the  Vajpayee 
Government. In a meeting with the President, Mr. K. R. Narayanan, 
this  morning, Mr. Goh suggested that India further open  up  the 
information technology and banking sectors. The President, on his 
part,  said  the Indian economy was looking towards a  seven  per 
cent growth rate in the coming years. 

In  the  absence of the External Affairs  Minister,  Mr.  Jaswant 
Singh,  who  is away in London, the Minister of State,  Mr.  Ajit 
Panja,  called  on  the  visiting  dignitary.  Mr.  Panja  sought 
collaboration with Singapore in the field of urban development.

Later in the evening, Mr. Goh held talks with the Prime Minister, 
Mr.  Atal Behari Vajpayee, who hosted a banquet for him.  At  the 
banquet,   Mr.  Vajpayee  asked  the  Singapore   Government   to 
participate in a global effort to combat terrorism. Referring  to 
the  recent  hijacking  of an Indian  Airlines  plane,  he  said, 
``India  is among the world's foremost targets of  cross-  border 
terrorism and has been so for a number of years.''

Advocating a collective effort, Mr. Vajpayee said, ``there are no 
international  boundaries  to  terrorism. Small  arms  and  other 
deadlier  weapons are easily available in the arms market  for  a 
price. Most of these are funded by (the) drugs trade which is  an  
equally deadly scourge of the last century which will continue in 
the  new millennium if no serious collective action is  taken  to 
combat it.''

Sources  here  said that India and Singapore  had  established  a 
special  relationship in the early Nineties. Singapore  played  a 
key role in making India a full dialogue partner of the ASEAN  as 
well as the member of the multilateral ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) 
which looks at ways to enhance regional security. Both sides also 
had an active defence equation and India regularly trained  naval 
personnel  form  Singapore  in  anti-submarine  warfare.  Defence 
scientists  of  the  two sides were also working  together  in  a 
variety of areas including artillery systems.
