
Musharraf gets China's 'unconditional support'


BEIJING,  JAN. 18. The Pakistani military ruler,  General  Pervez 
Musharraf,  today  left  for  home  after  winning  unconditional 
diplomatic and political backing from the Chinese leadership  for 
his administration.

The unconditional Chinese backing for the Pakistani  military-led 
government  came during two days of talks between Gen.  Musharraf 
and Chinese leaders, including the President, Mr. Jiang Zemin.

``China  pursues  a comprehensive partnership with  Pakistan  and 
would make new efforts to consolidate and advance  Sino-Pakistani 
relations,  Mr.  Jiang,  also general  secretary  of  the  ruling 
communist  party,  told the Pakistani chief  executive  during  a 
meeting here, the Xinhua news agency reports.

Earlier  today, the Chinese Parliament Speaker and  former  Prime 
Minister,  Mr. Li Peng, told Gen. Musharraf  that  Sino-Pakistani 
friendship was firmly entrenched.

``The   friendly  relations  and  cooperation  between  the   two 
countries  had been strengthened while cooperation in  political, 
economic,  military,  scientific, cultural and other  fields  had 
borne fruits,'' Mr. Li said.

During talks yesterday, the Prime Minister, Mr. Zhu Rongji,  told 
Gen.  Musharraf that China's support for Pakistan would  continue 
regardless  of  developments  on the  domestic  or  international 
scene.

Mr.  Jiang  described China and Pakistan as good  neighbours  and 
that   their  friendship,  established  on  the  basis   of   the 
fundamental  interests  of the people of the two  countries,  had 
stood the test of time.

``The  mutual understanding and support of the two countries  are 
due   to  adhering  to  the  five  principles  of  peaceful   co-
existence,''  he  stressed  while  hoping  that  Pakistan   would 
maintain social stability and economic development.

``China  would like to see a more stable, prosperous Pakistan  in 
future,'' he said. 

He also declared that China would pursue good relations with  all 
neighbouring  countries  on the basis of the five  principles  of 
peaceful  co-existence  and would not interfere in  the  internal 
affairs of other countries.

Gen.  Musharraf  described  his visit to China  as  fruitful  and 
thanked  the  Chinese  leadership  for  their  understanding  and 
support over the years.

``Cooperation and friendship between the two countries should  be 
cemented in the new century,'' the Pakistani chief executive, who 
arrived  here  yesterday  for  a two-day  working  visit  at  the 
invitation of Mr. Zhu Rongji, said. 

- PTI
