
Congress(I) plans 'offensive' against Gujarat order


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 18. The Congress(I) will  launch  an  offensive 
against the Gujarat Government's circular which allows Government 
servants  to  take  part  in  the  activities  of  the  Rashtriya 
Swayamsevak  Sangh. The thrust of the attack is that the  BJP  is 
going against Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy and ideals.

The  Congress(I) sankalp yatra, which was earlier to converge  in 
Delhi  on January 30 (Martyr's Day), will now be diverted to  the 
Sabarmati Ashram in Ahmedabad. Mr. Arjun Singh, CWC member,  said 
a public rally would be held there on that day to be addressed by 
the party president, Mrs. Sonia Gandhi.

All the CWC members will take a pledge at Gandhi Smriti in  Delhi 
(where the Father of the Nation fell to Nathuram Godse's  bullet) 
that  day. Then they will meet the Prime Minister and ask him  to 
have the circular withdrawn.

On  Monday,  Mrs.  Gandhi  wrote  a  letter  to  the   President, 
requesting  his intervention. The party will wait for a few  days 
to see if the Vajpayee Government asks the Gujarat Government  to 
rescind  the  circular.  Failing  that,  it  will  continue   its 
agitation.

Two CWC members, Mr. Ahmed Patel and Mr. Rajesh Pilot,  expressed 
apprehension over the Gujarat Government's move as dangerous. Mr. 
Pilot warned ``Gujarat is the beginning, we don't know where  the 
RSS will stop. Every citizen should rise in protest against  this 
assault  on  national  character.''  The  Prime  Minister  had  a 
photograph  of Mahatma Gandhi on his walls ``but his beliefs  lie 
elsewhere,'' he said.

Two  sitting MLAs from Bihar joined the Congress(I)  today.  Mrs. 
Mohsinha Kidwai, CWC member and AICC general secretary in  charge 
of Bihar, welcomed Mr. Hari Ram Sardar of the JMM (Soren) and Mr. 
Devipad Upahdyay of the CPI into the party.

The  Congress(I)'s central election committee, which was to  meet 
today to begin finalising candidates for the Assembly  elections, 
has  been  postponed  since Mrs. Gandhi is in  Amethi.  The  AICC 
spokesman,  Mr. Ajit Jogi, said the new dates would be  announced 
later.
