
Cyber laws need to be framed, says Kalam


By Our Legal Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  18.  The  Senior  Scientific  Adviser  to  the 
Government  of  India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam has  called  for  a 
Constitutional amendment for protection of Indian space.

``Our  Constitution demands defending air, land and water and  we 
have  laws on them. There is an immediate need for protection  of 
Indian space above 30 kms altitude. There is also an urgent  need 
to enact a law to protect under water,'' he said, delivering  the 
first   golden  jubilee  lecture  on  `Law  and   Dimensions   of 
Technology',  as part of the golden jubilee celebrations  of  the 
Supreme Court Bar Association (SCBA) here today.

The  nuclear scientist warned of information warfare in the  next 
five years and said there was an urgent need to enact cyber laws, 
otherwise  the  ``hagging,'' which had already started,  had  the 
potential to damage the economy of the country. 

``India is now on the path of rapid industrial and  technological 
advancements.  Our  laws have to provide adequate  protection  in 
this  national endeavour. Our Government has adopted policies  of 
techno-economic liberalisation which are attracting  corporations 
of the West in a big way,'' he said.

``We have to make suitable laws to ensure that the incoming trade 
enterprises  do not set their undue market dominance at the  cost 
of our technology and industry. History should not repeat through 
so  called  technology  carriers, which may  well  be  technology 
Trojan horses,'' he observed.

Dr. Kalam said on May 11, 1998, the Indian scientists tested  the 
nuclear weapon thus declaring India a Nuclear Weapon State (NWS). 
The developed countries clamped restrictions on ``our  indigenous 
R  & D organisations with denial of technology, loans from  World 
Bank,  denial of business centres, but the indigenous  technology 
and self-reliance on food combated the situation.'' 

``We have a situation where the national laws and legislation  of 
the powerful nations have come to dictate the international norms 
and  behaviour. The present Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty  (CTBT) 
is  a  glaring example of how five nuclear weapon  countries  can 
steam-roll the agenda of an international treaty of far  reaching 
consequence,'' he said.

He pointed out that ``when India proposed CTBT in the 1950s as  a 
step  towards  total  nuclear disarmament,  the  US  was  totally 
against  it. Now the same CTBT is being blatantly used  to  serve 
the  non-proliferation agenda of the NWS with total disregard  to 
either   the  original  nuclear  disarmament  goals  or  to   the 
legitimate  security  compulsions of India, which is now  a  NWS.  
CTBT has lost its relevance technologically.''

Mr. Arun Jaitley, Minister for Information and Broadcasting,  who 
was  the  chief  guest,  said  in  the  context  of  battle  over 
information, several laws had become out-dated and need  changes. 
He explained how the Government was keen to enact various laws to 
meet the technological advances.

Mr. K.K. Venugopal, president of the SCBA, thanked the Government 
for sanctioning Rs. 1 crore to the Association to mark its golden 
jubilee.   He  said  the  amount  would  be  utilised   for   the 
construction of an auditorium. 
