
Centre to help U.P. tackle power crisis


By Our Special Correspondent

LUCKNOW,  JAN.  18.  The Union Minister for  Energy,  Mr.  P.  R. 
Kumaramangalam,  today  assured all necessary assistance  to  the 
Uttar Pradesh Government to meet the situation arising out of the 
ongoing strike by over 90,000 employees of the State  Electricity 
Board causing a severe power crisis in the State. 

Mr.  Kumaramangalam,  who arrived here at the invitation  of  the 
Chief  Minister,  Mr. Ram Prakash Gupta, agreed  with  the  State 
Government's  decision  to  restructure the  UPSEB  saying  these 
reforms  had  become necessary for the State's  development.  The 
decision  on the reforms had been taken at the  Chief  Ministers' 
meeting  to formulate the National Action Plan for Power in  1996 
and had already been implemented in several States. It was  wrong 
to  suggest that the World Bank had a role in this  decision,  he 
said.

The  country, he added, would need Rs. 1 million crores  to  meet 
its power demands a decade later. Restructuring of the system had 
become  necessary  for development of the power  sector  and  the 
State Government's decision was in the right direction.

The Northern Grid would meet the State's power demands if it fell 
short  of its own generation. Consideration of credit  terms  for 
payment  of  dues to the Central Generating Public  Sector  Units 
would  be  made  and help would be provided  for  maintenance  of 
generating  units,  improvement  of the  Plant  Load  Factor  and 
maintenance of power lines. The Centre would also help accelerate 
the  reform  process including distribution, the  Union  Minister 
said. 

Under  normal  conditions,  the Northern Grid has  a  load  which 
varies  between 14,000 MW and 16,300 MW. There is a  gap  between 
demand  and availability to the extent of 1500 MW.  The  regional 
availability on Monday morning was 15,200 MW while on Tuesday  it 
had gone up to 15,700 MW, he said. With the help of the  Northern 
Grid, the State could meet its entire load, he claimed.

He also claimed that an improvement in generation at Anpara. When 
the strike began, there was only one unit of 500-MW in operation. 
Thereafter,  one  unit of 200 MW and another of 500 MW  had  been 
brought  on line, he added.  At Obra, where the power  generation 
had come down to zero, one machine of 200 MW had been lit up  and 
the other was ready to go into operation. It was expected that  a 
breakthrough  in  operating these machines would  come  about  by 
Wednesday, the Minister said.
