
IA employees, management on a collision course


By Gargi Parsai

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.18.  Indian  Airlines employees  are  set  on  a 
collision  course  with  the  management  over  the  decision  to 
decrease  the  retirement age of employees to 58 years  from  60. 
They  have  sought  the  Prime Minister,  Mr.  A.  B.  Vajpayee's 
intervention in turning down the Board of Director's resolution. 

What  has  upset most employees is that  the  decision  affecting 
hundreds  of  them was couched in secrecy and got  cleared  by  a 
truncated  Board  of Directors on a day when the quorum  was  not 
complete. Furthermore, the lowering off retirement age was listed 
as ``any other item'' on the agenda.

The  proposal  was  moved  by  the  IA's  chairman-cum-  managing 
director, Mr. Anil Baijal and approved by a lone member, Mr  G.P. 
Gupta  of of IDBI. Two other members, the managing-  director  of 
Air  India,  Mr M. D. Mascarenhas and the  chairman  of  Airports 
Authority of India, Mr D. V. Gupta, who were not present, sent in 
their letters of approval in absentia-to a proposal that was  not 
even mentioned in the agenda!

 The  management  has  justified the action  as  a  cost  cutting 
measure - when about 460 new persons were employed by the airline 
in  the last two years. Besides, fresh advertisements  have  been 
put  out  for recruitment of pilots, engineers  and  technicians. 
Indian  Airlines is thus out to swap experienced hands for  fresh 
recruits  who  might  will training at  additional  cost  to  the 
airline. What is mystifying is that without induction of any  new 
aircraft IA wants to recruit more pilots and engineers.

 The unkindest cut is that the decision has been spear-headed  by 
the  bureaucrat chairman-cum-managing director, who himself  will 
retire  at  age 60 as per the recommendations of  the  Fifth  Pay 
Commission.  If the decision is approved by the Government,  then 
Indian  Airlines would lose at one go - from May onwards -  about 
30 per cent of its top management. Some of them were in the  line 
for the top job and were awaiting promotions after the freeze  in 
the  last  1.5  years,  which  will  now  affect  their   pension 
prospects.  Some  of  the unions have represented  to  the  Prime 
Minister   urging  his  intervention.  Describing  the  move   as 
``discriminatory'',  they  protested  the  justification   saying 
Indian  Airline  had made a cumulative profit of Rs  31.20  crore 
till  November,  1999, so there was no  justification  to  reduce 
staff for cutting costs. In fact, during April to November, 1999, 
Rs  2040 lakh was paid towards overtime to employees. About  1100 
employees  of erstwhile Vayudoot Airline were merged into  Indian 
Airline,  adding to the number of manpower to an aircraft,  which 
is  about  350  per aircraft, as against 250 or  less  for  other 
airlines.  Besides, an average of over 1200 casuals were  engaged 
to carry on daily work.  

 The  Kelkar  Committee on restructuring of Indian  Airlines  had 
recommended  10  per cent reduction of staff during the  next  10 
years.
