
Maran launches Tannery Modernisation Scheme


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  18. The Commerce and  Industry  Minister,  Mr. 
Murasoli  Maran, today launched the Tannery Modernisation  Scheme 
of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion. The  scheme 
aims  to  fulfill  the much-needed  and  much  awaited  financial 
assistance   to   existing   tannery   units   for    undertaking 
modernisation programme and better capacity utilisation. It  will 
be  operative  during the Ninth Plan for 1999-2000  to  2001-2002 
covering around 350 existing tanneries in India. The total outlay 
envisaged is Rs.40.75 crores of which the Government's assistance 
will be Rs.964.60 lakhs.

 Under   this   scheme,  existing   tannery   units   undertaking 
modernisation programme will be eligible for assistance. 

 Financial  assistance under the scheme would be payable only  on 
such  projects in which the loan by the Bank Financial  Institute 
has  been  sanctioned on or after the date of  sanction  of  this 
scheme.   In  case  of  self-financed   modernisation   projects, 
financial assistance will be payable only in such projects  where 
order  for purchase of machinery has been placed on or after  the 
date  notifying  this  scheme.  The  project  submitted  by   the 
tanneries concerned will be assesses to be financially viable and 
bankable.

 The financial assistance under the scheme will be to the  extent 
of  30  per cent of cost of plant and machinery  for  small-scale 
units  and  20 per cent of cost, plant and  machinery  for  other 
units  (ie,  non-small-scale units) subject to ceiling  of  Rs.28 
lakhs and Rs.35 lakhs respectively. 

 The steering committee will be responsible for implementation of 
the  scheme.  Its scope would be to lay down  procedures,  decide 
normative  costs,  accord sanction of financial  assistance  from 
Government,  and  monitor and follow up  disbursal  of  financial 
assistance.

 An  official release says, for day-to-day implementation of  the 
scheme,  the  programme  management  unit  of  Small   Industries 
Development  and Employment Programme in leather sector  will  be 
the Secretariat of the Steering Committee.

 Small  Industries  Development Bank of India will be  the  nodal 
agency  for the scheme. Whenever cases are received by the  SIDBI 
which  are  not  in  the small scale  sector,  it  would  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  SIDBI to forward the case  to  IDBI  for 
consideration.
