
PDS: NE Food Ministers seek Centre's help


By Our Special Correspondent

GUWAHATI,  JAN.  18. The conference of Food  and  Civil  Supplies 
Ministers  of  the seven North-Eastern States,  West  Bengal  and 
Sikkim,  here  today,  discussed  the  whole  gamut  of  problems 
relating to the public distribution system (PDS).

But  the trend of the discussions and the resolutions adopted  at 
the conference showed that for taking all remedial measures,  the 
States were passing the buck on to the Centre.

For  enhanced  supply  of PDS items to the N.E.  region,  it  was 
decided  to ``persuade'' the Railways to make available at  least 
four  rakes  per  day.  This  was  discussed  threadbare  at  the 
officials'   meeting  yesterday  where  Railway   representatives 
explained  they  had no difficulty in providing  the  rakes.  The 
problem  is  that the States do not have the capacity  to  handle 
more than three rakes per day.

Similarly,  for timely movement of PDS items by road, the  Centre 
was  urged  to  ``sanction adequate funds''  for  buying  trucks. 
Again,  for  faster movement of essential commodities  at  lesser 
cost, the Centre was requested to expedite talks with  Bangladesh 
for reviving rail and river routes through Bangladesh.

But  it  is  on  the vital  question  of  preventing  large-scale 
stealing  and  blackmarketing of PDS items, as brought out  by  a 
study  undertaken  by  Tata  Economic  and  Consultancy  Services 
(TECS), the Ministers failed to suggest any effective steps.

All  that  the  conference decided was that the  Food  and  Civil 
Supplies  Department  of the States should publish in  the  local 
newspapers the monthly allotments made to the districts and  sub-
divisions  and  the district and sub-divisional  authorities,  in 
turn,  should release to the press and local Consumer Forums  the 
list  of  the  allottees  and the  quantities  of  various  items 
allotted every month.

Similarly,  to  prevent massive smuggling of rice  and  sugar  to 
neighbouring countries like Bangladesh, the conference  suggested 
that  no  new fair price shops should be opened or  new  licenses 
issued  to  wholesalers in the border areas.Also,  the  Food  and 
Civil  Supplies  Departments of the States  having  international 
borders  should ``take follow up action to ensure prosecution  of 
persons''  engaged  in  smuggling and  the  district  authorities 
should also ``review the situation with their counterparts across 
the border.''

The  Assam Chief Minister, Mr. P. K. Mahanta, who  presided  over 
the  conference,  emphasised  the  need  for  increasing  storage 
facilities  so  that  at  least four to  six  months'  stocks  of  
foodgrains could be kept.
