
Cong.-NCP coordination panel to meet


By Mahesh Vijapurkar

MUMBAI,  JAN.  18.  The coordination panel  of  the  Congress(I)-
Nationalist  Congress Party- led Government in  Maharashtra  will 
meet  on  January  24  here to  review  the  performance  of  the 
Government. 

The  NCP and the Congress(I) appear set to attract flak from  the 
smaller  parties such as the Samajwadi Party and the  Janata  Dal 
(Secular)  for  running the Government without taking  them  into 
confidence.  In  fact, the JD(U) has even called  some  decisions 
taken by the coalition as ``anti-people'' against which  ``public 
protests will be organised''. 

Most  of the steam is likely to be let off by the SP, the  JD(U), 
two  factions of the RPI, the BRP-BMS, the Peasants and  Workers' 
Party  and the CPI(M) which supports the Government but is not  a 
member of the Ministry. 

Ironically,   all   the   parties,   except   the   CPI(M)   have 
representatives,  along  with independents, in the  Ministry  but 
some  entities such as the JD(U) have none in the  Cabinet  where 
decisions  are  taken.  For  instance, it has  to  make  do  with 
trickled  down information, because in the team, its  nominee  is 
only a Minister of State. Only now will the consultations get  an 
inter-party institutionalised structure.

Today,   for   instance,  Mr.  Nihal  Ahmed,  JD(U)   chief   for 
Maharashtra, made it known that because they have the  compulsion 
of  sustaining a secular Government to keep the Sena-BJP out  all 
the time, they would do nothing to bring the  NCP-Congress(I)-led 
Government  down. But it would, from January 30,  begin  campaign 
against  the  Government's  policies. Most  of  the  parties  are 
chaffing  at the recent decision to make English compulsory  from 
Standard I in schools even if the normal requirement of  teachers 
are not available for teaching existing subjects. The decision to 
not  keep the prices of essentials under the PDS  stable  through 
infusion of subsidies has irked the constituent parties.

The  latest  decision  to excuse nearly Rs. 80  crores  worth  of 
electricity  bills  of  powerloom  owners  in  one  single  town, 
Bhiwandi,  where pilferage is the norm than an exception has  not 
been taken to kindly.

There  can  be a long list of grievances, which, one  can  assume 
would be explained by the two parties but it is unlikely that any 
of them would be withdrawn.
