
No need for U.N. probe, says Jakarta


By P. S. Suryanarayana

SINGAPORE,  JAN.  18. Indonesia will ask the  United  Nations  to 
desist  from setting up an international tribunal to  investigate 
the alleged role by Jakarta's military officers in fomenting  the 
recent carnage in East Timor, now under the global organisation's 
protective umbrella prior to full independence in a few years. 

Before leaving for New York, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mr. 
Alwi  Shihab,  said he would seek to brief  the  U.N.  Secretary-
General,  Mr.  Kofi Annan, on Indonesia's  ``credible''  national 
human   rights  commission.  As  this  commission   was   already 
investigating the alleged atrocities committed by the  Indonesian 
military  officers  in  East  Timor, there was  no  need  for  an 
international war crimes trubunal. 

The move by Indonesia for ``internalising'' the investigation  of 
its  military  officers came as the  President,  Mr.  Abdurrahman 
Wahid asserted that an army coup was not likely in the prevailing 
circumstances  and  that an attempt, if any,  would  be  resisted 
through stern counter-measures. At a different but related level, 
Jakarta's  efforts  to  keep  the U.N.  from  launching  a  probe 
acquired  new meaning in the context of  developments  concerning 
the  ``internalisation'' of the issues at stake.  An  independent 
panel,  entrusted with the task of bringing about  reconciliation 
between the Muslims and Christians in Maluku, is reported to have 
discovered  evidence  of a possible link  between  the  year-long 
communal  violence  in  several  places  of  the  Spice  Islands, 
including Ambon and some sections of the Indonesian armed forces. 

But  there was no authoritative confirmation of this as also  the 
reported view of the reconciliation panel that the blame for  the 
strife in the Spice Isles could even be traced up to the doorstep 
of  Gen. Wiranto, presently the Senior Minister for Politics  and 
Security  Affairs  and formerly chief commander of  the  combined 
Indonesian military forces. All the same, the move by Jakarta  to 
treat  the  issues  concerning its armed forces  as  an  internal 
matter,  added  yet another dimension to the  ongoing  Indonesian 
debate on the sensitive question of the military's options.

Significantly,  however,  the rumours of  a  possible  Indonesian 
military  coup and Mr. Wahid's response remained in  considerable 
focus  in South-East Asia today. The Malaysian Defence  Minister, 
Mr. Najib Tun Razak, said a military intervention in Jakarta  was 
unlikely.  In making this assessment, Malaysia joined  Singapore, 
both neighbours of Indonesia, in discounting the apprehensions of 
a possible coup in Jakarta now. 

Meanwhile,  tension  prevailed  in Mataram, the  capital  of  the 
tourist  resort  of West Nusa Tenggara. At least  one  person  is 
believed to have died as a result of the violence that erupted in  
the  wake  of  a rally by the  country's  majority  Muslim  group 
against  alleged atrocities by a minority Christian community  in 
the  Spice Isles. Reinforcements of security personnel have  been 
rushed to Mataram. 
