
Bid to moderate harsh statements?


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD,  JAN. 18. The Pakistani Chief Executive,  Gen.  Pervez 
Musharraf's  interview  to  TheHindu, his  first  to  any  Indian 
newspaper,  is being seen here as a major effort by  Pakistan  to 
moderate  some of the harsher statements that have emanated  from 
Islamabad.

Though  the General pulled no punches in Monday's  interview,  it 
was  clear that Pakistan's military ruler made a definite  effort 
to  address an Indian audience. ``So, therefore, I would  request 
now  that Indians....if they keep harping on what I said and  did 
at Kargil and this hijacking and that, you are not going to  make 
progress...'' the General said, adding that he would not turn his 
cheek to ``flak'' from across the border.

``We  need  to sit. I am for peace. There is no  doubt....I  want 
this  region  to develop economically. Now, I have  said  this  a 
hundred  times, everywhere. I can give a certificate  in  writing 
and sign the paper. But they have to take me on face value.  They 
have  to trust me and that whatever I am saying I mean, and  they 
have to come along...'' the General stated.

The  General's  interview,  which  has  been  reproduced  in  all 
Pakistani newspapers this morning, is a message, a signal to  the 
Government  of  India. The message is both simple  and  direct  - 
Pakistan's  military is willing to engage with you - if  you  are 
willing to do so in an honourable and equitable manner.

It is not as if the General has diluted his position in any  way. 
He has just articulated his concerns in a manner that could  make 
him  appear  reasonable.  The Chief  Executive  even  denied  his 
``Kashmir  first'' condition dialogue for India, a point he  made 
during a recent visit to Muzaffarabad.

Also,  in  an earlier interview to the BBC's  Urdu  service,  the 
General  had  dismissed  the Lahore process as  a  ``phalana  and 
dhimkana''  process. However, in his interview to  TheHindu,  the 
General  said  he was not against the ``essence'' of  the  Lahore 
Declaration and the Shimla agreement.

The  Army Chief, while making repeated references to  Kashmir  as 
the ``core issue'' with India, did not however speak of the  U.N. 
resolutions  on Kashmir even once. Though, it can be argued  that 
Kashmir  and  the U.N. go together for  Pakistan,  it's  omission 
could be significant.

``When  the  General talks about trust and being  taken  at  face 
value,  he  wants  that India should  engage  him,''  Syed  Talat 
Hussain, Executive Editor of The News, told this correspondent. 

Mr.  Hussain also felt that the General was, perhaps,  frustrated 
by the approach adopted by India towards the military Government. 
However, he also stated that the Chief Executive could have  been 
``more tactful'' in his remarks that he would not take flak  from 
India sitting down. 

Ever  since  October  12, 1999, India has  shunned  the  military 
Government  of  Gen. Musharraf, a policy  that  exhausted  itself 
following the Kandahar hijack when the External Affairs Minister, 
Mr.  Jaswant  Singh,  made  a desperate  call  to  his  Pakistani 
counterpart, Mr. Abdul Sattar. 

Given  the present state of play between India and  Pakistan,  it 
would  be  unrealistic  to  expect  any  immediate  dialogue   on 
substantive issues. But, civilised channels of communication need 
to be kept open precisely because of the tension in the air. 

It is commentary enough on both India and Pakistan that the  only 
contacts  between  the  two sides relate  to  ``summoning''  each 
other's diplomats to lodge protests and mouth denials. 

This  is  not  to say that India does not  have  a  problem  with 
Pakistan, which provides fertile territory for terrorists of  all 
hews  to  operate brazenly against India. While  Pakistan  cannot 
realistically  expect  India to get down  to  substantial  issues 
straightway,  a start can be made by allowing High  Commissioners 
to work ``normally'' in meeting with Government functionaries.

Islamabad,  too, must appreciate that public sentiment  in  India 
after  Kandahar  and the statements of Masood Azhar is  dark  and 
that   the  quality  of  contacts  between  the  two   sides   is 
precariously hinged on Pakistan's showing good faith on issues of 
terrorism. A start, for instance, can be made by handing over the 
hijackers of the Indian Airlines plane to New Delhi. 

During  the  interview, Gen. Musharraf also drove home  the  fact 
that  the  military  in  Pakistan had always  played  a  role  in 
politics.  When  he  said this, the Chief  Executive  was  merely 
stating a fact. 

``Here the military has always played a role. It has not been  so 
in  India.  But  here  it has been... now,  I  don't  believe  in 
hypocrisy - whereas the military's playing a role, you still  say 
no, no military's not playing a role....,'' the General said.

The interview was an attempt to inform India and Indians that the 
military's  role  in  Pakistan cannot be  wished  away.  It  also 
underlined  that  the General is still  in  his  straight-talking 
mould.

While  Pakistan must make up its mind on whether or not  to  meet 
Indian concerns on terrorism, New Delhi has to re-think it's non-
engagement posture with Islamabad.
