
Russian House opens with calls for unity


By Vladimir Radyuhin

MOSCOW,  JAN  18.  The new Russian Parliament  opened  its  first 
session  today  with the acting President,  Mr.  Vladimir  Putin, 
urging cooperation between the executive and legislative branches 
of Government and ruling out dictatorship in Russia.

``The  executive power is prepared for fruitful cooperation  with 
the new Duma,'' Mr. Putin said in his address to the lower House, 
the  State  Duma, elected in December. ``We will not  divide  the 
lawmakers  into `ours' and `theirs.' We need the  widest  support 
base in the State Duma.''

None  of  the  parties or coalitions has  control  over  the  new 
Parliament.  Communists  and two Kremlin-backed  parties  control 
roughly 30 per cent of the State Duma's 450 seats each, with  the 
rest divided among another six groups, which are expected to ally 
either with Communists or the pro-Government parties on  specific 
issues.

Mr. Putin, former head of the domestic security service, strongly 
rejected  suggestions  that  following the  election  of  a  hung 
Parliament  and snap presidential elections in March that  he  is 
heavily tipped to win, he would push Russia towards dictatorship. 
Russia's  next  President will  inherit  near-dictatorial  powers 
which  the first post-Soviet President, Mr. Boris Yeltsin,  wrote 
into the 1993 Constitution for himself.

However,  Mr.  Putin  called for ``a policy  of  cooperation  and 
mutually  agreed restraints'' by the Kremlin and  Parliament  and 
urged  an  end  to  ``the  policy  of  confrontation  and  mutual 
ambitions.''

In  a  new spirit of reconciliation Mr. Putin  had  accepted  the 
deputies'  invitation to attend the opening session of the  lower 
House.

Party  leaders  in  the new State Duma failed  to  hammer  out  a 
package  deal on the election of the Speaker and the  sharing  of 
committee portfolios in pre-session talks. Deputies are  expected 
to  choose  the Speaker from among several candidates  in  secret 
ballot,  with the incumbent, Mr. Gennady Seleznyov,  favoured  to 
retain  his  post.  Other candidates  include  the  former  Prime 
Ministers, Mr. Yevgeny Primakov, and Mr. Sergei Stepashin.
