
Ekeus nominated UNMOVIC head


By Kesava Menon

MANAMA (BAHRAIN) JAN. 18. In nominating the Swedish diplomat, Mr. 
Rolf  Ekeus,  as the head of the new United  Nations  Monitoring, 
Verification  and  Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),  mandated  to 
discover  and  destroy Iraq's weapons of  mass  destruction,  the 
Secretary  General, Mr. Kofi Annan, has apparently resorted to  a 
holding operation.

Iraq  was  not at all happy with Mr. Ekeus when  he  performed  a 
similar  role between 1991 and 1997 and has made its  displeasure 
known  after Mr. Annan's announcement. Russia, or one  of  Iraq's 
other friends on the Security Council, is very likely to veto Mr. 
Ekeus's  nomination  and since this possibility would  have  been 
taken  into account, Mr. Annan has basically asked  the  Security 
Council to make up its collective mind. 

Mr. Ekeus has been nominated as executive chairman of the UNMOVIC 
which was set up under Resolution 1284 passed on December 17 last 
year.  It  had been left to Mr. Annan to nominate  the  executive 
chairman after consultations with the members of the Council  and 
it  was understood that the process would be completed  within  a 
month. Mr. Annan was reported to have listed out the names of  18 
to  25  people for the Security Council's consideration  but  the 
members  could  not agree on any one of them. In the  event,  Mr. 
Annan has apparently decided to nominate a person of his  choice, 
knowing full well that his nominee is likely to be rejected.  But 
he has performed his duty and it is up to the members to come  up 
with a new name. 

Iraq  has  stated that Mr. Ekeus's  nomination  demonstrates  the 
U.N.'s dishonesty towards it. Iraq believes, not without  reason, 
that  the weapons inspection programme has been used more  as  an 
instrument  to keep Iraq under the burden of economic  sanctions. 
On several occasions, the U.N. Special Commission (UNSCOM)  which 
was UNMOVIC's predecessor, seemed more intent on finding proof of 
Iraqi  non-compliance with the inspection regime than in  finding 
out  the  details  of  Iraq's weapons  of  mass  destruction  and 
destroying  them. Mr. Ekeus headed UNSCOM from 1991 to  1997  and 
then went on to become Sweden's ambassador to the United  States. 
Although  Iraq  was  to  find that  Mr.  Ekeus's  successor,  the 
Australian  diplomat,  Mr. Richard Butler, was an  even  stronger 
upholder  of U.S. interests, Baghdad has not forgotten  that  Mr. 
Ekeus was not blameless either. 

Although there have been no specific reports on the matter, it is 
inconceivable  that  Mr.  Annan would have  nominated  Mr.  Ekeus 
without  discussing it with him. It is surprising that Mr.  Ekeus 
agreed  to  the  nomination since he  had  complained  of  bitter 
experiences in his dealings with Iraq and had even accused  Iraqi 
officials  of  having tried to intimidate him.  While  the  Iraqi  
regime  is  certainly not lily-white, most Governments  do  agree 
that  Baghdad has a right to demand that the  executive  chairman 
come  without any pre-meditated notions of Iraqi non-  compliance 
or non-cooperation. 

As per Resolution 1284, the economic sanctions against Iraq  will 
be much circumscribed if the inspection regime gets underway. The 
legal  aspects  of  the embargo on oil  exports  will  be  almost 
completely lifted though Iraq will not be able to reach its  full 
potential  for oil production and shipments till it  repairs  its 
infrastructure. The resolution also provides some relief to  Iraq 
in respect of materials and supplies to repair its oil production 
facilities.  What  is  more  important  is  that  the  resolution 
provides  scope  for four-monthly suspensions of the  embargo  on 
imports,  provided  UNMOVIC reports, within a few months  of  the 
commencement of its operations, that Iraq is fully complying with 
the resolutions, that is, it is co-operating wholeheartedly  with 
the inspection teams. 

The  executive  chairman of UNMOVIC will have a  crucial  say  in 
shaping  the  assessment  whether  Iraq  is,  or  not,  in   full 
compliance and his personality is, therefore, of vital importance 
to  the Iraqi Government. But Iraq is also continuing its  policy 
of combating the Security Council, especially the U.S., at  every 
step in trying to get the sanctions completely lifted.
