
TDP rejects Congress charge


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD, JAN. 18. The Telugu Desam has rejected the Congress(I) 
charge that the finances of the State are a shambles and reminded 
it  of the fact that half of the accumulated debts of Rs.  27,000 
crores can be traced to its tenure in 1989-94.

``When  we came to power in 1995, we inherited dues to a tune  of 
Rs.  13,000  crores from them (the Congress) which we  are  still 
repaying.  You know there is moratorium for the present  loans,'' 
the  Minister for Finance and Legislative Affairs,  Mr.  Yanamala 
Ramakrushnudu,  said  at a press conference here on  Tuesday.  He 
agreed,  however, that the economy was under ``heavy strain''  to 
cope  with  rising expectations, aspirations and demands  of  the 
people, never so bad that it could not pay salaries.

The  ruling  party fielded Mr. Ramakrushnudu,  a  former  general 
secretary, to effectively counter the Opposition criticism as the 
man  in  charge  of  finances.  Messrs  Lal  Jan  Basha,  general 
secretary,   R.  Chandrasekhar  Reddy,  spokesman,  and  Dr.   N. 
Jagannath,  floor  leader in the Lok Sabha,  also  addressed  the 
media.

Mr.  Ramakrushnudu  said  the Government  had  been  giving  full 
details  of the economy, yet the Congress entertained doubts  and 
sought  to  confuse  people by distorting  official  figures  and 
``circulating  its  own''. It was surprising that a  party  which 
ruined the economy, encouraged corruption and general decline  in 
public  life during its long stint in power should now  demand  a 
white  paper on the finances when it had never released  a  white 
paper or kept the people informed. There would be full debate  on 
the issue in the upcoming budget session of the Assembly. 

Trotting out statistics, the Finance Minister said the economy of 
the  State  had improved much; it was better than  in  any  other 
State, including Rajasthan. To say that it was not in a  position 
to even pay salaries to employees was nonsense. There was not one 
instance  of  delay  in  payment  of  salaries.  There  was  much 
improvement in four key indicators of economy growth: GSDP growth 
rate  was up from 4.79 per cent in 1994-95 to 10.85 per  cent  in 
1998-99;  per capita income growth rate from 4.79 to 9.53 in  the 
same  period, food production touched an all-time high of  149.05 
lakh  tonnes  and  12.26 lakh ha was  brought  under  the  plough 
additionally while the last 7 months of the current year showed a 
10.50  per cent growth in industry. These figures were  there  in 
the  books  in the Assembly; one did not need a white  paper  for 
this, only the patience to read. 

Mr.  Ramakrushnudu  explained that the total debts stood  at  Rs. 
27,850  crores, including Rs. 16,000 crores to the Government  of 
India.  Last year, the State Government paid Rs. 2,500 crores  by  
way of interest and would pay another Rs. 3,100 crores this year.

The Minister said in order to overcome the fiscal deficit of  Rs. 
3,500  crores. they would go for a ``zero-based and  a  realistic 
budget''  discouraging  post-budget commitments  which  triggered 
such deficits.
