
TNCC(I) 'sankalp yatra' begins


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI, JAN. 18. The Tamil Nadu Congress(I) Committee president, 
Mr.  Tindivanam K. Ramamurthy, today flagged off `sankalp  yatra' 
to New Delhi from Sriperumbudur, about 45 km from here. 

The  aim  of  the yatra, according to the TNCC(I)  chief,  is  to 
reassure  the  party's  commitment  to  welfare  of  the  people, 
secularism,  unity and integrity of the country. It is  organised 
as  part  of the nation-wide programme by the AICC(I).  Mr.  Mani 
Shankar  Aiyar, MP, DCC(I) presidents and Youth  Congress(I)  and 
women volunteers participated in the yatra. 

Similar  yatras  are  being conducted by all the  PCC(I)  in  the 
country,  which will culminate in New Delhi on the  Martyr's  Day 
(January  30).  The  party president,  Mrs.  Sonia  Gandhi,  will 
address the meeting. 

Addressing  the party workers, he said, volunteers of  the  yatra 
would  organise  road-side  meetings en route  to  New  Delhi  to 
explain  the  party's programmes to people in rural  areas.  They 
would  also  create  an awareness among people on  the  need  for 
adopting small family norm. 

He said the yatra by the TNCC(I) would be received at the  Andhra 
Pradesh border by the APCC(I) president. Mr. R. Chenga Reddy, MLA 
from  Andhra  Pradesh, participated in  the  inaugural  function. 
Another  yatra  by  the  TNCC(I) was flagged  off  by  the  party 
treasurer, Mr. V. Dandayuthapani, from Kanyakumari on Tuesday.

Talking  to  newsmen later, Mr. Ramamurthy said  all  the  DCC(I) 
presidents  in  the State had been directed  to  conduct  similar 
yatras in their respective districts before January 30. He denied 
there was delay in organising the yatra in the State and said  it 
was  as per the schedule fixed by the High Command. Referring  to 
three Assembly by-elections to be held in the State in  February, 
he said he would be leaving for New Delhi on Wednesday to apprise 
the party president of the prevailing political situation in  the 
State. 
