
CM refutes criticism on farmers' market


By Our Staff Reporter

CHENNAI,  JAN. 18. The Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi,  today 
assailed  the critics who debunked the farmers'  market  (uzhavar 
santhai) scheme as a non-starter.

The  skeptics wanted the scheme to fail but contrary to this  the 
scheme had gained momentum and more such markets would be  set-up 
in 100 municipalities in the State.

In  just two months of its launch, the direct marketing  facility 
in  14 districts had helped farmers sell 41.71 lakh kilograms  of 
vegetables accounting for a turnover of Rs.2.58 crores, he said. 

The Chief Minister, launching a livestock protection programme at 
Thirukazhukundram,  said  those who were against the  scheme  had 
even  planted  reports  in  newspapers  that  farmers  were   not 
interested  in  the  scheme  as the  business  was  dull  in  the 
marketing centres.

The reports had also stated that vegetables were not available in 
the market places even at 10 a.m. It was funny that one statement 
contradicted  the  other. If vegetables were  not  available,  it 
would only mean that the business was brisk, he said.

Speaking  about the livestock programme, Mr.Karunanidhi said  the 
programme  was yet another effort by the government to serve  the 
farming   community.  The  programme  would  provide   veterinary 
services  at the doorsteps of farmers, as the rural  people  paid 
scant attention to their own health, let alone the health of  the 
livestock they reared and depended upon.

Similar  to  the  farmers'  market,  Mr.  Karunanidhi  said   the 
preventive health care (Varum mun Kappom) programme had proved  a 
great  success and in the 237 camps conducted in 21 districts  so 
far, about 3.17 lakh people had been screened and 23,244 of  them 
referred for further attention at base hospitals. Medicines worth 
Rs.14.15 lakhs had been distributed at the camps. 

The  livestock  protection  camp  at  Thirukazhukundram,  covered 
nearly  7,000  heads  of  cattle. The  Chief  Minister  said  425 
veterinary   professionals   drawn   from   Veterinary   Services 
Department  and  the Tamil Nadu Veterinary  and  Animal  Sciences 
University (TANUVAS) rendered the necessary services.

Mr.Karunanidhi  said the credit for the establishment of  TANUVAS 
should go to the DMK Government. Since it was set up in 1989  the 
University  had distinguished itself as a leading institution  in 
South-East Asia. 

A  diagnosis kit for the blue tongue disease and video  cassettes  
on  calf,  sheep and pigeon rearing were released  by  the  Chief 
Minister on the occasion.

The Animal Husbandry Secretary, Mr.Mohan Varghese Chunkath,  said 
the  Government  proposed to conduct 383 such camps  every  month 
from  February  and  Rs.38.3 lakhs had been  set  apart  for  the 
current year, ending March 31.

Mr.P.M.Senguttuvan,  Animal Husbandry Minister, said  the  scheme 
for  enhancing livestock productivity was part of the  series  of 
welfare  measures initiated by the Government for the  uplift  of 
the poor and needy.

Mr.K.Sundaram,  Minister for Dairy Development,  Dr.R.Prabaharan, 
Vice Chancellor, TANUVAS, Mr.A.Sukumaran, Kancheepuram Collector, 
Ms.R.Leelavathi, Director, Veterinary Services stressed the  need 
to enhance livestock productivity.
