
3 killed in blast during film shooting


By Our Staff Reporter

BANGALORE, JAN. 18. Three persons were killed, two of them on the 
spot,  and seven injured in an explosion during the  ``shooting'' 
of  a song for a Kannada film on Tuesday afternoon at  the  Madhu 
Arts  Studio  owned  by  Abbhaih  Naidu,  which  is  located  off 
Uttrahalli Road in Chikkalasandra, Bangalore South.

Two  of the dead have been identified as Raviraj  alias  ``Bomb'' 
Ravi  (28) and his assistant Shiva Kumar. Another assistant,  who 
died  in  the explosion, is yet to be identified.  Seven  others, 
including Kannada cine artiste, Mr. Sai Kumar, have been admitted 
to  the  Deve  Gowda  Hospital  in  Padmanabhanagar  with   minor 
injuries.

The explosion was triggered off accidentally when Raviraj and his 
two   assistants  were  readying  the  low-intensity   explosives 
believed to be Penta Erthyl Tetra Nitrate which were being placed 
under  colour  bags  for a song sequence  of  the  film  ``Ticket 
Ticket''. 

Eye-witnesses  said there were more than half a kg  of  explosive 
and all of them went off with a deafening sound at about 2  p.m., 
in the portico of the studio when Raviraj's assistants  connected 
the wires of the explosives. Raviraj and his two assistants  were 
blown  off.  While  Raviraj  died  in  D.G.  Hospital,  his   two 
assistants died on the spot.

Sai Kumar, who was in the vicinity of the portico, suffered minor 
injuries along with Thriller Manju, Michael, Sashidar, Srinivasa, 
Gurumurthy  and  Prakash. The front portion of  the  building,  a 
Maruti  car and two two-wheelers parked near-by were  damaged  in 
the explosion.

The head of one of the dead was blown away and parts of the  body 
were  strewn around. Pieces of colour bags, glass  pieces,  wires 
and other equipment were scattered over a wide area.

Eye-witnesses  said the toll would have been higher had  not  the 
``extras'' and other artistes not adjourned for lunch. More  than 
200 people, including 150 horsemen, and 18 women dancers were  to 
have participated in the final ``shooting'' of the song sequence.

The  Commissioner of Police, Mr. T. Madiyal, said the  explosives 
were placed under the colour bags in different places as part  of 
the  special effects for the song on Lord Ganesha. A  pandal  had 
been  set  up in front of the portico, and Raviraj  and  his  two 
assistants  were  readying  the  explosives  when  the   incident 
occurred.

The   Deputy   Commissioner  of  Police  (South),   Mr.   H.   S.  
Satyanarayana Rao, said Raviraj had handled such scenes involving 
explosives  in  hundreds of Kannada, Telugu and Tamil  films.  He 
said  a case under Section 304 A, read with Explosives  Act,  had 
been booked in Subramanyapuram police station. 

The officials of the Bomb Squad from the Intelligence wing rushed 
to  the  spot and defused the live detonators. Experts  from  the 
Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) collected samples of the debris 
for  analysis.Soon after the explosion, the police  cordoned  off 
the   studio.  Senior  police  officials  including   the   Joint 
Commissioner of Police, Mr. B. N. Nagaraj, visited the spot. 

The body of one of the three men who died in the explosion during 
the  shooting  of  a Kannada film song at  Madhu  Art  Studio  in 
Bangalore on Tuesday. - Photo: T.L. Prabhakar.
