
Senior AIADMK leaders call on Moopanar


By N. Kalyanasundaram

CHENNAI, JAN. 18. Are the TMC and the AIADMK coming closer?  This 
seems to be the current topic of discussion in political circles.

If the AIADMK general secretary, Ms. Jayalalitha, calling on  the 
TMC  president,  Mr.  G.  K.  Moopanar,  sometime  ago  and   the 
subsequent  meeting  of the two leaders at an Ifthar  party  were 
described as events suggesting a thaw in the relationship between 
the two parties, another event slated for February 2 is bound  to 
set more tongues wagging.

Two  senior functionaries of the AIADMK, Mr. K.  A.  Sengottaiyan 
and  Mr.  Karuppusamy Pandian, today called on Mr.  Moopanar  and 
handed  over  a  letter  from Ms.  Jayalalitha  inviting  him  to 
participate in a meeting she was organising to condole the  death 
of   V.  R.  Nedunchezhian,  who  was  AIADMK   party   chairman. 
Indications  are that leaders of parties who were allies  in  the 
recent Lok Sabha elections have been invited.

For those who read between the lines, the venue, Kamaraj hall  in 
Teynampet has some significance. Whatever may be the reason, this 
is the first meeting of the AIADMK party under the leadership  of 
Ms.  Jayalalitha  being held in this hall. That Mr.  Moopanar  is 
participating in a political event organised by the AIADMK  lends 
credence to one view that a new polarisation of political  forces 
is  in  the  offing in Tamil Nadu. It is learnt  the  TMC's  main 
allies, IUML, Janata Dal (S), Dalit Panthers of India and RPI are 
also to be invited for the February 2 event.

Though no indication is available from the TMC sources, the  fact 
remains  that  Mr.Moopanar is now holding  elaborate  discussions 
with  senior  leaders  of the party on the future  course  to  be 
adopted keeping in view the recent positive signals both from the 
Congress(I) and the AIADMK.

However, some TMC leaders seem to hold the view that there is  no 
urgency  to take a decision regarding electoral  alliance  before 
the by-elections to the three Assembly segments, scheduled to  be 
held on February 17. 

They  also  feel that the Congress(I) should be involved  in  any 
effort  to form an electoral alliance in the State  because  they 
feel  that  the  right course would be to firm up  some  kind  of 
coordination  with  the  Congress(I)  before  entering  into  any 
arrangement with other parties.

Meanwhile,  though two senior leaders of the Pondicherry unit  of 
the  Congress(I)  had met Mr. Moopanar a couple of days  ago  and 
held talks, the slow progress in regard to the Pondicherry  issue 
is  attributed  to the Congress(I) high  command's  preoccupation  
with polls in some northern States. And the two key players,  the 
Congress(I) and the TMC in Pondicherry are not in a hurry because 
of the problem of uniform sales tax. This is a ticklish issue  in 
the  Union Territory confronting the present DMK led  Government. 
Any  transition at this juncture would not be favourable  to  the 
Congress(I)-TMC combine, local partymen feel.

Mr.  Moopanar convened a meeting of office-bearers  this  evening 
for  detailed  discussion relating to  latest  developments.  The 
priority  given  to the recent political development by  the  TMC 
leadership  is  indicated  by its  inclination  to  postpone  the 
structural  changes in the organisation, the scheme for which  is 
now ready. 
