
Electoral rolls revision: action against two officials


By Our Special Correspondent

SALEM,  JAN. 18. Disciplinary action has been  initiated  against 
two  officials  of  the State Government here  ``for  failing  to 
verify  the applications for inclusion in and deletion  from  the 
new electoral rolls properly''.

According  to official sources, due to timely check and  counter-
check, the mistakes could be rectified. ``No serious action  like 
suspension  was  considered  necessary  as  the  preparation   of 
electoral rolls was only under process''.

Today  the  district administration sought  permission  from  the 
Election  Commission  for  publishing  the  new  electoral  rolls 
following completion of verification of applications in the Salem 
Lok Sabha constituency regarding which the AIADMK and the TMC had 
levelled serious allegations.

The  sources  said  that  of the  11  Assembly  segments  in  the 
district,  electoral  rolls  for  nine  -  except  Salem  I   and 
Veerapandi  -  had been published already. The  clearance  sought 
today was for publishing the rolls for the remaining segments.

``After  verification  in  these segments, the  total  number  of 
claims  and objections are well below the norms of  the  Election 
Commission'', the sources added.

It  may  be  recalled that Mr. K.  J.  Rao,  Secretary,  Election 
Commission,  accompanied by the Chief Electoral Officer of  Tamil 
Nadu, Mr. Naresh Gupta, made a spot study here in this connection 
a few days ago.

At  that  time, he told presspersons  here  that  ``definitely',' 
there had been an ``attempt to stuff the electoral rolls in Salem 
Parliamentary constituency''.

He pointed out that as against the State average of two per  cent 
of  claims  of  the total number of  electors  (applications  for 
inclusion  in  the  new electoral rolls) and  0.31  per  cent  of 
objections  (applications  for  deletions),  three  of  the   six 
Assembly   segments  in  Salem  Parliamentary  constituency   had 
received an ``unusually high'' number.

While Salem I constituency received 18,597 claims (8.77 per cent) 
and 13,446 objections (14.35 per cent), Salem II received  17,786 
claims  (7.63 per cent), 14, 618 objections (6.26 per  cent)  and 
Veerapandi  15,557 claims (6.25 per cent) and  26,615  objections 
(10.69 per cent).

Mr. Gupta said that on receipt of complaints from various parties 
that  there was an attempt to include the names of  bogus  voters  
and  delete those of genuine ones, he had deputed nine  teams  to 
various  parts  of  the State. Of them, some  had  visited  Salem 
district twice and made a study for five days in total.
