
Colourful start to schools youth fete


By G. Prabhakaran

PALAKKAD, JAN. 18. The 40th State Schools Youth Festival,  billed 
as  Asia's biggest cultural event, had a colourful start  at  the 
Fort Maidan here today. The Education Minister, Mr. P. J. Joseph, 
inaugurated the festival by lighting the traditional lamp in  the 
presence of thousands of people including students.

A  colourful pageant was taken out from the Victoria  College  to 
the Fort Maidan in the evening before the inauguration.

The Minister said the youth festival is the biggest such event in 
the  country and in Asia. The participation of a large number  of 
people  in the festival shows the importance and  popularity  the 
programme has gained over the years.

The  Minister said the schools youth festivals in the State  have 
produced  a large number of top class artistes in the  fields  of 
cinema,  music, dance and culture. Some of the Kalathilakams  and 
Kalaprathibhas of yesteryear have become top class film artistes. 
These   artistes   are  popular  in  the  State,   national   and 
international  levels.  They include Vineeth, Manju  Warrier  and 
Monisha. This is the biggest achievement of the youth  festivals. 
And  this has been acknowledged by leading film personalities  in 
the country.

The  Minister  said that in view of the large number  of  talents 
available  in the State, the Government is planning an  institute 
of national standard like the Kalamandalam to provide training to 
those who prove their talent in the schools youth festivals.  The 
services  of India's best artistes would be utilised to  run  the 
proposed institute.

He said the schools youth festivals have helped to revive some of 
the  traditional folk art forms of the State like Ottam  Thullal, 
Chakkiarkoothu etc.

The Minister said the youth festival manual has been updated  and 
a committee formed to look into complaints regarding prizes. Most 
of the top positions are photo finishes and it is very  difficult 
to  decide  the  top  slots. The  judging  committees  have  been 
instructed to take maximum care to avoid any complaints.

He  appealed to the participants, teachers and parents to see  to 
it that the competitions are taken on a sportsman spirit.

The  Minister  said the criticism against  the  District  Primary 
Education  Programme has no basis as it has been proved  that  it 
has  helped to improve the standard of education at  the  primary 
level. The Revenue Minister, Mr. K. E. Ismail, presided.

Mr.  T. K. Naushad, Mr. Jose Baby, Mr. K. Achuthan,  Mrs.  Girija 
Surendran, all MLAs, the District Panchayat president, Mr. K.  V. 
Vijayadas,  the  municipal  chairman,  Mr.  P.  P.  Dominic,  the 
Education  Department  Secretary,  Mr.  K.  Jayakumar,  and   the 
District Collector, Dr. K. Elangovan, spoke.

The  Director of Public Instructions, Mrs. Lida  Jacob,  welcomed 
the gathering.

The competitions began at 11 stages in the evening. The  five-day 
festival will conclude on January 22.
