
Turning Carnatic music Jazzy


THE  STAGE  is all set. The curtains for  `Saarang  2000',  IIT's 
cultural  festival, go up on the evening of January 21.  Formerly 
known  as Mardi Gras, the speciality of the fest over  the  years 
has  indisputably been the professional shows popularly known  as 
`proshows' and the crowds they draw.

This  year  `Proshows' include a dance performance by  Ms.  Shoba 
Natarajan  and her troupe to kick-start the festival  on  January 
21, a light music concert by S. P. Balasubramaniam on January  25 
and a rock show featuring artistes from Juravi, Burn and  Nemesis 
Avenue, to bring the curtains down on January 26.

The  usual fare? Not exactly, for what IIT on January 23  has  in 
store is a concert that promises to redefine jazz fusion. 

Millennium  Zee  will  showcase IIT's own  Prasanna,  the  multi-
faceted  guitarist  and  composer - the man  who  played  several 
numbers for A. R. Rahman and Ilaiyaraja including `July  Maatham' 
(Puthiya  Mugam),  `Kannodu Kanbathellam' (Jeans),  `Kasu  Melae' 
(Kathala Kathala). 

He successfully explored Carnatic music with his electric  guitar 
and has to his credit a degree in Jazz and Classical  composition 
from  Berkeley  College  of Music where he  pocketed  the  guitar 
achievement  award  and the composition  achievement  award  last 
year.

Not  that  it is a one man show. The concert  also  features  the 
Grammy and Oscar nominated Alphonso Johnson, who has `bassed' his 
guitar for Santana, Weather Report, Billy Cobham, Bob Dylan, Phil 
Collins and many other artistes of International repute. And then 
there  is the ``ubiquitous'' Kenwood Dennard who has wielded  the 
drum  stick  for artistes including Sting, Miles  Davis,  Whitney 
Houston, Janet Jackson and Eric Clapton.

``It  is  not fusion, the fusion part of it is  very  subtle  and 
inside  the music. Jazz fusion is a very broad term, it does  not 
mean Carnatic music with jazz. Here it is more contemporary  with 
Jazz, Rock, Blues and Reggae compositions with a strong  Carnatic 
element.  We are using Carnatic music inside jazz...I cannot  say 
this is Carnatic and this is Jazz,'' Prasanna explains.

The   trio   will   be  largely   playing   Prasanna's   original 
compositions.  ``Kenwood  and  I  have  been  thinking  of  doing 
something  together  for long when I used to play in the  US.  So 
when  `Saarang' was coming up, I thought we can be a part of  the 
festival.  I hope to bring a wider audience to Carnatic music  by 
showing it in its own way and in the language people know it.  It 
is  my  way of giving back to the place world-  class  music  and 
exposure to International artistes for people to see them perform 
with someone they know,'' says Prasanna. 

But  not all that takes place on the 23rd will be  planned.  ``It 
will  be  an  artistic  adventure of  sorts.  It  will  have  its 
spontaneous  elements and feature what they can do. Though  every 
complex  Carnatic bit has been notated and clearly worked out  in 
the  language they understand, I am still curious how  they  will 
interpret it and that will be the most fascinating part of  it,'' 
he says.

( Sudhish Kamath)
