
Ramadoss to attend allies' meet


By Our Special Correspondent

SALEM,  JAN. 18. The PMK leader, Mr.S.Ramadoss, would attend  the 
meet  of the NDA allies called by the Chief Minister and the  DMK 
president,  Mr.M.Karunanidhi, on January 21, to  discuss  various 
issues   pertaining   to  bylections  to   the   three   Assembly 
constituencies in Tamil Nadu.

Mr.Ramadoss told presspersons here that his party would not  seek 
any  of  the three seats thus quashing the rumours  that  it  was 
trying to get Nellikuppam.

``We  will  not accept Nellikuppam even if we were  to  be  given 
because it was a seat held by the DMK previously''.

He  said his party would work for the victory of the NDA  in  the 
ensuing   elections.   He   dismissed   the   rumours   regarding 
``irritants'' cropping up among the allies. 

``The  alliance will continue in the next Assembly  elections  as 
well'', he asserted.

Mr.Ramadoss  was critical of including a Kashmiri Pandit  in  the 
recently  constituted National Minorities Commission. ``If  there 
is no such convention so far, it is wrong to have included such a 
member''.

To  a question on the uniform sales tax, he said he was in  total 
agreement  with the Chief Minister that it should not be  imposed 
on any state as it would infringe the rights of the states. 

``If a consensus could be evolved in co-operation with the states 
like  Pondicherry who are totally opposed to this, then there  is 
no harm in implementing it''.

Would  he apply the same yardstick to the Electricity  Regulatory 
Authority that was trying to oversee the functioning of the State 
Electricity Boards ? ``Yes'' was the reply.

Asked whether he favoured ``one man one post'' concept as decided 
by  the  DMK  recently, he said `` as a concept  I  welcome  this 
though I would not like to say anything regarding the DMK. 

This would definitely help decentralisation of power and avoid  a 
large number remaining just workers while a few cornering all the 
benefits''.
