
Talk of the town


EVEN  GARBAGE  has  its uses, for those in power.  When  the  pet 
project of the Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, the  ``Uzhavar 
Santhai''  was launched in several districts, it was  decided  at 
the  highest  level that the garbage handling  at  these  markets 
would   be  left  to  units  of  Exnora,  the   Community   Based 
Organisation wherever possible.

The  handling of waste by the CBO at Madurai had won laurels  and 
the garbage handling at 11 ``Uzhavar Santhais'' was entrusted  to 
it.

Yet,  the  going  has not been smooth for Exnora  at  three  such 
farmers'  markets:  Tiruchi, Tindivanam and  Salem.  Reports  say 
those  who  command greater influence with the  political  bosses 
have  been  able to ``convince'' them that it is better  left  to 
them, than to the voluntary organisation.

Apparently,  though Exnora could generate manure from the  waste, 
it  would not help in the growth of the personal agenda  of  some 
politicians.

The work of raising revenue from cycle stands, tea shops and free 
toilets  is however being handled by the CBO, which has made  the 
made the markets a no-smoking zone.

THE HERO'S day (MGR's 83rd birth anniversary) has meant to recall 
the multi-faceted matinee-idol turned politician's  achievements. 
But it turned out to be just the opposite.

MGR's  films succeeded mainly because of their  `social  message' 
and  their songs were replete with lyrics of such themes, set  to 
melodious tunes. Mr. T. M. Soundararajan, MGR's `voice' for  over 
two decades, was there for the occasion.

But all that TMS was allowed to do was to sing a couple of songs. 
The  accompaniment  was not what the originals contained,  but  a 
mixture of the latest of pop, jazz and undefinable noise.

All  the same the 77 year old TMS had only kind words  for  those 
who accompanied him in the performance.

Asked whether he felt thrilled, the singer of yesteryear remarked 
that  the  organisers could have done better,  without  giving  a 
noisy  ``modern''  interpretation to the songs of  the  legendary 
MGR.

METROWATER MAY be a monopoly and may give that impression most of 
the time, but not when it comes to mineral water.

The water agency is preparing well in advance for its product  to 
flow  in the crowded mineral water markets smoothly. News of  the  
launch of the pure variety from Metrowater was sent to about  500 
officers,  many  of whom will be able to decide on buying  it  in 
bulk.

Insiders  say  that  Metrowater's joint sector  product  will  be 
priced  below  the competition, but then the latter  may  respond 
with its own price cuts.

Whatever the price, mineral water is not wholeheartedly  endorsed 
by  at  least one section: doctors. The industry may  cry  itself 
hoarse,  but medical professionals say mineral water  -  bottles, 
sachets  and cans - generally can be really certified fully  safe 
only after double boiling. Perhaps this situation has arisen  due 
to  the entry of many shady operators in the sector,  along  with 
dependable  big names. Will Metrowater become a sine qua non  for 
quality?

(S. R. Ashok Kumar and T. Ramakrishnan)
