
CPI, CPI(ML) reach accord on seat sharing in Bihar


By K. Balchand

PATNA, JAN. 18. The CPI and the CPI-ML (Liberation) today reached 
a  partial  agreement on seat adjustment and failed to sew  up  a 
broad alliance of Left forces as a third alternative in Bihar.

The  CPI  and  the CPI(ML) went  ahead  with  their  announcement 
leaving  behind the Forward Bloc, the RSP, the MCPI and the  SUCI 
with  whom  they intend to forge a new front in the  State.  They 
also did not take into consideration the CPI(M) and the MCC, both 
of  which had allied with the RJD in the Lok Sabha elections,  in 
their scheme of things.

The  CPI and the CPI(ML), however, have kept the doors  open  for 
the  Samajwadi Party of Mr. Mulayam Singh Yadav. The  leaders  of 
these  two  parties,  Mr. Jalaluddin Ansari  and  Mr.  Ram  Jatan 
Sharma,  claimed that they had received a list of  the  Samajwadi 
Party only today and that they would do justice with their claims 
to the extent possible.

The  Samajwadi  Party  list is a long one  demanding  158  seats, 
whereas the CPI and the CPI(ML) have set aside 268 constituencies 
for  themselves out of the 324-member Assembly that goes  to  the 
polls next month.

The  two left parties, however, maintained that efforts would  be 
made  to  accommodate  the  SP  by  making  sacrifices  whereever 
possible.Actually,  the CPI and the CPI(ML) have  themselves  not 
been able to avoid friendly clashes in 25 constituencies. As  per 
their agreement, the CPI will receive the support of the  CPI(ML) 
in  154 constituencies and the former intends to reciprocate  the 
latter  in  84  seats.They  failed to reach  a  consensus  on  25 
constituencies. Interestingly, the CPI(ML) has decided to contest 
four such constituencies - Islampur, Nala, Rajpur and Motihari  - 
represented by the CPI in the present House.

The  CPI(ML)  leader,  Mr. Umesh  Singh,  justified  the  party's 
decision to field its candidates from these constituencies  which 
the  CPI  had  won in the 1995 Assembly elections  which  it  had 
contested in alliance with the erstwhile Janata Dal. The  CPI(ML) 
claimed  that the ground realities had changed over the year  and 
it  had  emerged a greater force than the CPI, evident  from  the 
developments and results of the successive Lok Sabha elections.

It  is  the  first time that the CPI is fielding as  man  as  179 
candidates in Bihar. Way back in 1985, it had fielded as many  as 
163  candidates  when it had contested the elections on  its  own 
steam and had managed to win about 13 seats.

In 1995 it had contested 52 seats in alliance with the JD and won 
26 of which six had deserted and formed a separate party.  During  
the  Lok Sabha elections the CPI expelled one of its MLAs.  Hence 
the   party   will  be  fielding  new  faces   in   these   seven 
constituencies while retaining the other 19 sitting MLAs.

The most surprising aspect of the coming together of the CPI  and 
the  CPI(ML)  is that they would be fielding  candidates  against 
sitting  members  of the CPI(M) and the MCC, unlike  in  the  Lok 
Sabha  elections when care was taken to avoid a  showdown  within 
the Left firmament.
