
Growth and poverty


ON  THE  FACE of it, a worsening of poverty in India  during  the 
Nineties is inconsistent with the superior growth performance  of 
the  economy  after  the  launching  of  reforms  in  1991.  Yet, 
estimates  based on data collected during the  official  National 
Sample  Survey  over  the past decade unambiguously  point  to  a 
deterioration  in  rural India, a marginal improvement  in  urban 
centres and an overall increase in both the number and proportion 
of  people  living below the poverty line. The  decade  that  has 
ended  witnessed a substantial transformation of the economy  and 
yet  where it mattered most the achievements appear to have  been 
dismal.  These  trends  are so startling that there  has  been  a 
tendency to dismiss the poverty data as faulty statistics. It  is 
possible that the estimates are indeed inaccurate. But that needs 
to  be  first  established  by the  research  community  and  the 
Planning  Commission, which traditionally measures the  incidence 
of  poverty with NSS data. The Planning Commission  usually  does 
not  make  estimates  on the basis  of  ``thin  (small)  sample'' 
information  of  the  NSS - which is the  basis  for  the  latest 
poverty  figures.  However,  since the  issue  has  major  policy 
implications  it cannot await for the NSS to come up  with  large 
sample  information.  An  evaluation of the  poverty  norms,  the 
methodology  of estimation and the quality of NSS data has to  be 
undertaken  as  a matter of priority in order  to  settle  doubts 
about the accuracy of the poverty estimates.

At  second  glance, however, an increase in  poverty  during  the 
Nineties  should  not  be all that surprising.  The  past  decade 
witnessed a slow-down in agricultural growth. Since the reduction 
of  rural impoverishment has always been closely linked to  rapid 
growth  in agriculture, it is possible that the slow-down,  aided 
by  the  stagnancy in funding of and larger leakages  from  rural 
development  programmes,  caused  a  setback  to  rural   poverty 
alleviation. The faster growth of the Nineties was driven by  the 
manufacturing  and  service  sectors.  As  both  these  sets   of 
activities  are  concentrated in urban areas,  the  reduction  of 
urban  poverty and the deterioration in the rural areas are  both 
consistent  with the pattern and pace of growth in  the  previous 
decade.  Further, there were wide regional disparities in  growth 
during  the Nineties. The populous States with a large number  of 
poor - notably Bihar and Uttar Pradesh - were also the ones which 
experienced  unsatisfactory  growth rates even  as  the  national 
economy was recording a more rapid pace of expansion. This  could 
be  yet  another plausible reason for the increase in  rural  and 
national poverty in the post-reform era.

If the estimates of the course of poverty during the Nineties are 
an  accurate  reflection of the developments on  the  ground,  it 
certainly does not mean that the country is better off  returning 
to the pre-reform economic policies. It would, however, call  for 
a re-orientation and correction of policies in a number of areas. 
First,  it  is clearly not enough to merely  accelerate  economic  
growth. Broad-based and labour-intensive growth is essential  for 
a   substantial  reduction  of  poverty.  A   transformation   of 
agriculture  must  be  central  to such  a  growth  process.  The 
acceleration in industrial growth that has taken place since 1991 
has  perhaps been of the capital-intensive variety and growth  in 
financial   services   and  trade  has  limited   potential   for 
employment.  Second,  the excessive concern with  the  reform  of 
fiscal,  industrial  and  trade policies  and  the  corresponding 
neglect of rural development policies has not helped the cause of 
poverty  alleviation.  However,  an  improvement  in   Government 
finances  and  in the administration of  anti-poverty  programmes 
remain preconditions for larger funding and better  effectiveness 
of such programmes. Third, faster growth that widens regional and 
economic  inequalities will only exacerbate social, economic  and 
regional  tensions. This reinforces the need for a more  balanced 
and labour-intensive growth process. Liberalisation has proceeded 
on  the  assumption that it enjoys a  political  consensus.  That 
consensus,  if indeed it exists, will break down if there  is  an 
increase  rather than a decrease in poverty in the midst of  more 
rapid GDP growth.
