
CTBT: a phoney consensus?


By M. R. Srinivasan

THE  NEWSPAPERS are full of articles from various people  on  the 
question  whether  India should sign the Comprehensive  Test  Ban 
Treaty (CTBT) or not. A large number of commentators who claim to 
be  nuclear specialists have been urging that India  should  sign 
the  Treaty without any further delay. Some have gone further  to 
say  that  it  would  be  irresponsible  if  India  withheld  its 
signature and that it could end up in the rogue nuclear club. 

No one has cared to objectively assess the decision of the United 
States  Senate not to ratify the Treaty. Whether India signs  now 
or not and whether it ratifies or not a little later will make no 
difference to whether the Treaty enters into force. 

It  is simply an orchestration to build up a phoney consensus  to 
ram the Treaty down the throat of the country. Let us recall  the 
principled  opposition that Ambassador Arundathi Ghosh put up  in 
Geneva  some years ago when she said ``India will never sign  the 
Treaty, not now, not later''. Let us keep aside principles, which 
do not matter in the world of realpolitik. 

The phoney consensus is that India should make gestures that will 
create  the  right conditions for the U.S.  President,  Mr.  Bill 
Clinton's visit. High dignitaries of the Government and the media 
have  derived great satisfaction that the U.S. has  removed  some 
150 institutions from the Entities List. 

To  begin with, it was completely unreasonable to ban  export  of 
so-called  sensitive items to Bharat Heavy Electrical  Ltd  units 
which make power plant equipment. The removal of the Institute of 
Mathematical Sciences in Chennai would mean it can receive  books 
and magazines and maybe low-power computers from the U.S. 

How  the objectives of non-proliferation were met by the  earlier 
listing  will be clear only to the nuclear cold warriors  of  the 
U.S.!

India's  experience  with the fuel supply contract  entered  into 
with  the  U.S.  in 1963 shows how unreliable the U.S.  is  as  a 
supplier  of  high technology materials or  products.  An  inter-
Governmental  agreement between the U.S. and India was made  non-
operational on the ground that subsequently enacted U.S. domestic 
laws came in the way.

The  senior scientists of the nuclear and defence  establishments 
are reported to have advised the Government that India  possesses  
adequate  information  on nuclear weapons  design  for  different 
purposes  based  on  results obtained from  the  five  Pokhran-II 
tests. 

There  is  no  doubt that we have some  very  competent  computer 
modellers  who can use the data from the tests in  an  innovative 
way.  Also the art of modelling in the last decades has  advanced 
most dramatically compared to the Seventies or the Eighties. 

Nevertheless, the claims made sometimes that we are on a par with 
the  original nuclear weapon powers in weapon  design  technology 
are   certainly  exaggerated.  There  would  indeed  be   weighty 
scientific  opinion  that  we would need some more  tests  of  an 
explosive  kind  to really be able to design a  wide  variety  of 
weapons. 

The  U.S. has conducted over a thousand tests and even China  and 
France have conducted many times the number of Indian tests. Also 
it has been reported that the U.S. would supply China and  France 
with weapon test information on the ground that this will improve 
the  safety  of their nuclear weapons. No such courtesy  will  be 
shown to India by the U.S.

The  next issue relates to the no-first-use commitment  given  by 
the  Prime  Minister  shortly after  the  Pokhran-II  tests  were 
conducted.  The  U.S.  has consistently refused to  give  such  a 
commitment.  The former Soviet Union had given such a  commitment 
but Russia later abrogated it. China has given such a  commitment 
but has qualified that this will not apply to disputes concerning 
what it considers its own territories. 

Pakistan   has  consistently  refused  to  give  a   no-first-use 
commitment  as  it  argues  with  reason  that  such  a  position 
effectively devalues the deterrent nature of the nuclear arsenal. 

The  Indian  position  of building  a  second  strike  capability 
appears  like day-dreaming as the costs of such a capability  may 
be  very  high for India to bear. Add to this the  draft  nuclear 
doctrine's intention to have a triad of nuclear missiles -  land-
based, air-based and submarine-based. The country can  ill-afford 
such  a  luxury  when  so much remains  to  be  done  on  poverty 
eradication and social development. 

The National Security Board which had a large advisory body could 
not  have discussed the issues objectively. Or its  members  were 
handpicked to produce a consensus acceptable to the Government.

Why  is  the Government so keen to sign the CTBT? The  desire  to 
please Mr. Clinton has already been mentioned. The Japanese  have 
told India to sign the CTBT if it wishes to avail of  development 
loans. Imagine a country defeated in the Second World War telling 
a nuclear India how it should behave! 

The U.S. has been saying that signing the CTBT has nothing to  do 
with  India gaining access to dual-use technology. Various  other  
U.S.  laws  applicable for export of such technology have  to  be 
complied  with.  There was a time when France, Germany  and  even 
Britain  and Japan took independent decisions on export of  dual-
use technology products. Now they all fall in line and bend  over 
backwards to satisfy the U.S. 

The U.S. administration sugarcoats all this by saying that it  is 
in India's interest to sign the CTBT now and the Fissile Material 
Cutoff  Treaty  later. It does not want India or anyone  else  to 
question  the  danger  to the world posed by  the  large  nuclear 
arsenals of the U.S., Russia, China, France and Britain. Any time 
the  issue  of  universal nuclear disarmament is  raised,  it  is 
laughed off as a bore.

The  Government  of India has hastily announced import  from  the 
U.S.  of  some  1,500 items covering a  wide  range  of  consumer 
articles  which are being produced within the country  and  which 
provide  vital  employment  to millions of our  country  men  and 
women.  Because  the motor car lobby is well  organised,  it  has 
expressed  concern  about the impact of  cheap  second-hand  cars 
coming to India on its business. 

There  is  no informed debate on the future of  the  self-reliant 
Indian  manufacturing enterprises and the  attendant  employment. 
Worse still is the behind-the-scenes move to allow multinationals 
into  the  retailing business. Some ten per cent  of  the  Indian 
population  earns its living from the retailing  business.  India 
has one of the lowest-overhead retailing activity. We seem to  be 
blindly  going ahead to invite high-overhead glitzy  departmental 
stores which could render millions of Indians destitute. 

It  was  a  shame a handful of hijackers  humiliated  the  mighty 
Government of India. Now our own elected leaders, claiming  great 
maturity  and  sagacity, are hijacking our  hard-earned  economic 
independence and kowtowing to the mighty Americans, Europeans and 
Japanese.

(The   writer  is  a  former  Chairman  of  the   Atomic   Energy 
Commission.)
