
Crucial Indo-Pak. issues


Sir,  -  Ms. Malini Parthasarathy's  thought-provoking  interview 
with Gen. Pervez Musharraf (TheHindu, Jan. 17) helps to put Indo-
Pakistan relations in perspective and identify crucial issues.

However, I wish that the interviewer had got his reaction to  the 
real  reasons for the Indian reluctance to hold a  dialogue  with 
him. It is unrealistic on the part of the General, considered the 
architect of the Kargil war, to expect India to trust him so soon 
after his misadventure. 

Secondly,  considering that he underplays the Shimla  and  Lahore 
declarations,   arrived   at  by   democratically-elected   Prime 
Ministers  from both sides, India's doubts whether  an  agreement 
reached  with  the military Government will be  acceptable  to  a 
future  democratic set-up are understandable. This also  explains 
India's  reluctance  to accord legitimacy  to  the  Musharraf-led 
Government. 

Thirdly,  while  the General admits to Pakistan's sway  over  the 
``mujahideen'' (in the context of their withdrawal from  Kargil), 
he is obviously unwilling to use this influence over them to  put 
an end to cross-border terrorism, one action which will earn  him 
goodwill  and  credibility in India. Fourthly,  Gen.  Musharraf's 
contention  that  Kashmir is the only issue to be  resolved  with 
India  is negated by statements from terrorist  organisations  in 
Pakistan about ``liberating'' India, after Kashmir.

Brig (retd). Partha Sarathy,

Chennai

Sir,  -  TheHindu  and  Ms.  Malini  Parthasarathy  deserve   our 
gratitude for having documented Pakistan's version of the Kashmir 
dispute.  Historically, since 1947, Kashmir has been an  integral 
part  of  India.  Will Gen. Musharraf claim  the  erstwhile  East 
Pakistan?  He  must  remember how Pakistan  viewed  the  Pushtoon 
agitation during the 1960s.

Gen.  Musharraf  says  ``the  root cause  is  Kashmir''  for  the 
unfriendly  political relations between Pakistan and  India.  The 
Line  of Control is the international border which Pakistan  must 
honour. It has been training mercenaries and terrorists.

Gen. Musharraf must first revive parliamentary democracy and  let 
the people's representatives take steps to strengthen civil rule. 
In  order  to  divert  the people's  attention,  the  General  is 
dilating  on  the Kashmir problem. India will  never  accept  his 
views on Kashmir.

Thomas Edmunds,

Chennai

Sir,  - Ms. Malini Parthasarathy's interview, at a time when  New 
Delhi-Islamabad  relations are at their lowest ebb,  enables  the 
Indian  people to know Pakistan's point of view on  the  critical 
issues  which  have been exercising their minds  ever  since  the 
General took charge as the Chief Executive.

It has been clarified beyond doubt that Pakistan is not  destined 
to  have  an  absolute  civilian  rule  even  if  it  reverts  to 
democracy. India will have to address itself to such a  prospect, 
although   this  is  not  a  new  experience  except   that   the 
relationship may call for a reorientation to suit the exigencies.

The  General maintains that Kashmir is the only  dispute  holding 
the key to a resolution of the other issues. Unfortunately,  this 
theory  is being extended to disarmament issues as  envisaged  in 
the  global  arena, little realising that it will  result  in  an 
open-ended arms competition in the absence of nuclear confidence-
building  measures on a bilateral basis. Unless the U.S.  enables 
India to come to grips with the final stand of Pakistan, it  will 
be  difficult  for New Delhi to make a  judicial  assessment  and 
evolve a consensus before signing the CTBT.

Syed Gowher Ali,

Chennai

Although  one  does  not  concur  with  the  General's  views  on 
Pakistan's  involvement in the IA plane hijack  and  cross-border 
terrorism,  one  must  agree  with  his  argument  how  bilateral 
relations   will   improve  considering   India's   attitude   of 
questioning  the  legitimacy  of his regime  and  its  consequent 
reticence to engage him diplomatically. This is a fit point to be 
pondered by our Government.

Did  we not officially and diplomatically deal with the  military 
regimes  of  Ayub Khan, Zia-ul-Haq and Yahya Khan? Then  why  not 
deal with Gen. Musharraf? The Government of India should jettison 
the ``to be or not to be'' attitude and initiate bilateral  talks 
with the present regime on all issues.

C.A.C. Murugappan,

Kothamangalam (T.N)
