
The hijacking & international law


By V. S. Mani

THE  HIJACKING  of  IC  814 has  sparked  interest  in  what  the 
international   law   is  on  the  subject.   Hijacking   of   an 
international  flight  of  a  civilian  aircraft  is  covered  by 
principles of both international customary law and treaty law. In 
international customary law, a range of principles flows from two 
broad norms. 

The  first norm is that every state has an obligation  to  ensure 
that its territory is not being used by any person in any  manner 
to the detriment of another state (International Court of Justice 
ruling in the Corfu Channel case, 1949). This is the basis of all 
rules   relating  to  the  prohibition  of  direct  or   indirect 
involvement  of states in international terrorism (some of  these 
rules were identified and elaborated by the ICJ in the  Nicaragua 
case in 1986). 

The  second  norm  is  that  states  owe  an  obligation  to  the 
international community to ensure protection of human rights (ICJ 
ruling in the Barcelona Traction Company case, 1969). As the  ICJ 
stressed  in  the  American Hostages in  Teheran  case  in  1980, 
``Wrongfully  to  deprive human beings of their  freedom  and  to 
subject them to physical constraint in conditions of hardship  is 
in  itself  manifestly incompatible with the  principles  of  the 
Charter  of  the United Nations as well as with  the  fundamental 
principles  enunciated  in  the Universal  Declaration  of  Human 
Rights.'' 

Contemporary  international  law underscores the  duty  of  every 
state  to  (a)  prevent perpetration of  terrorist  acts  against 
another   state   or  against  innocent  individuals,   and   (b) 
consequently,  to cooperate with other states in  preventing  and 
combating  terrorism  and  in punishing terrorists.  It  is  this 
aspect  of  the principle of suppression of  terrorism  that  has 
moved  the international community to evolve international  legal 
instruments  for the purpose of combating and punishing  acts  of 
international  terrorism  in  the  interests  of  protection   of 
territorial integrity of states and respect for human rights.

Four  multilateral  treaties  are  directly  relevant  to  aerial 
hijacking: (1) The Tokyo Convention on Offences and Certain Other 
Acts  Committed  on  Board  the Aircraft,  1963;  (2)  The  Hague 
Convention  for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of  Aircraft, 
1970; (3) The Montreal Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful 
Acts  against  the Safety of Civil Aviation, 1971;  and  (4)  The 
International  Convention against the Taking of  Hostages,  1979.  
The   first  three  were  evolved  under  the  auspices  of   the 
International  Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and the  fourth 
was  adopted  by the U.N. General Assembly. Of these,  the  Hague 
Convention  of  1970  is most directly relevant  to  the  IC  814 
hijacking.

At least six principal features of the Hague Convention (which it 
also  shares  with the Montreal Convention) may  be  highlighted. 
First, it defines the offence of hijacking and stipulates that an 
attempt to commit that offence or to aid and abet its  commission 
also amounts to hijacking. 

Second,  the Convention, like other  anti-terrorism  conventions, 
recognises,   explicitly  or  by  necessary   implications,   the 
jurisdictional claims of at least seven categories of states: (1) 
the state where the aircraft is registered, (2) the state of  the 
operator  (lessee)  of  the  aircraft, (3)  the  state  in  whose 
territory the aircraft lands with the alleged offender on  board, 
(4)  the state in whose territory the alleged offender is  found, 
(5) the state in whose territory or in whose airspace the offence 
was  committed,  (6)  the state whose  national  is  the  alleged 
offender,  and (7) the state whose security is directly  affected 
by  the  offence. It does not, however, prescribe  any  hierarchy 
among  these  possible competing claims to jurisdiction.  (It  is 
incorrect  to say that international law readily  recognises  the 
universality principle for exercise of jurisdiction by any  state 
over the offence, unlike the cases of piracy or war crimes.)

Third,  as a direct consequence of the possibility  of  competing 
jurisdictional claims, the Convention, for the first time in  the 
history  of treaty law, establishes a general obligation  on  any 
party  state in whose territory the offender is found  either  to 
take measures to prosecute him or to extradite him. If the  state 
does  not  extradite  him,  it  is  ``obliged  without  exception 
whatsoever  and whether or not the offence was committed  in  its 
territory''  to  take measures for his prosecution, in  the  same 
manner as it would in the case of any other offence of a  serious 
nature  under its law. Where there exists no extradition  treaty, 
the Convention itself may be used to serve the purpose.

Fourth, all states party to the Convention have an obligation  to 
render the prosecuting state ``the greatest measure of assistance 
in  connection with criminal proceedings'' including,  evidently, 
handing  over  of  any  evidence  or  other  information  in  its 
possession. Fifth, the Convention also imposes on a party state a 
number  of important procedural obligations such as the  duty  to 
take the alleged offender into custody or to ensure his  presence 
within  its territory, the duty to hold an immediate  preliminary 
inquiry  into  the facts of the offence, the duty to  notify  all 
relevant  states  of the detention of the offender, the  duty  to 
report  to  them the findings of the preliminary  inquiry,  where 
possible  the  duty to take all appropriate measures  to  restore 
control of the aircraft to its lawful commander, and the duty  to 
return the aircraft and its cargo.

Sixth,  the  Convention recognises the supervisory  role  of  the 
Council of the ICAO by requiring each party state to make a  full 
report  to the Council ``as promptly as possible''  any  relevant 
information  in  its  possession.  The  reporting  obligation  is 
substantive  and mandatory, not procedural, as the ICAO  has  the 
special  responsibility  under  its  constitution  (the   Chicago 
Convention  of 1944) to strive for the safety of  civil  aviation 
the  world  over. It would enable the organisation  to  take  any 
action  it may deem appropriate. A state may flout the  decisions 
of  the ICAO only on the peril of incarceration of  its  aviation 
industry.

Finally,  the  Convention also provides for an  optional  dispute 
settlement  mechanism  of arbitration or access to the  ICJ.  Its 
optional  nature notwithstanding, states cannot escape a  similar 
dispute  settlement mechanism over decisions of the ICAO  Council 
under the Chicago Convention.

In the light of the above, India should make an immediate  report 
to the ICAO (if it has not already done so), and immediately make 
a formal request to Pakistan and other states where the hijackers 
or  their accomplices are found either to prosecute them  without 
delay or to extradite them to India. The ICAO is the  appropriate 
forum  to  discuss  aerial hijacking. It may be  noted  that  the 
states involved in the IC 814 hijacking episode are all party  to 
the Hague Convention, and members of the ICAO. India has  already 
incorporated the Convention into its domestic law, vide the Anti-
Hijacking Act 1982 (Act 65 of 1982).

(The writer teaches International Air Law at the Jawaharlal Nehru 
University, New Delhi).
