
Shooting nightmares


THE ENVIRONMENT IS under severe threat in India. Rivers, beaches, 
forests and mountains are being destroyed by man, whose education 
and  knowledge  hardly seem to warn him of the tragedy  that  can 
befall  his  children  if he continues with  his  reckless  ways. 
Rivers are polluted with industrial waste. Even the most renowned 
of  the beaches - including the one in Chennai - are  treated  as 
huge  garbage  dumps.  Forests are stripped  of  their  greenery; 
animals  are  hunted down, and trees axed.  Mountains  present  a 
pathetic  sight; concrete monsters rise in expanding  patches  of 
ugly  brown. Heaps of rubbish, especially tonnes of plastic,  mar 
Nature's  awesome canvas. In the midst of all  this  devastation, 
man  remains  unmoved and unconcerned, despite telling  signs  of 
poor monsoons and climatic warming. 

The  latest peril to the environment is cinema, and the  Nilgiris 
in  the south of India serves as a classic example.  Film-makers, 
driven  out  of Kashmir by militants, have  found  a  picturesque 
haven in these hills. They had been a favourite locale since  the 
1940s, but movie-making was generally confined to summer, and  to 
some pockets. It is only in the last decade or so that the entire 
area began looking like a large cinema set. Noisy trucks,  smoke-
spewing generators and tens of people marred the pristine  beauty 
and quietude of the Nilgiris. Such activity there is particularly 
worrying,  because  the  region forms part of  a  rare  biosphere 
reserve  with invaluable flora and fauna. Priceless  insects  and 
birds,  even  some kinds of animals, are peculiar  to  the  area. 
Recently, well-wishers sought legal redress when they found  that 
a  Mumbai  film  company  had  erected  a  mammoth  set  on   the 
fascinating Lord Wenlock Downs, close to Ooty. Although the court 
ruling   was   considered   a   victory   of   sorts   for    the  
environmentalists  - the firm had to pay a fine and a fee of  Rs. 
50 lakhs - doubts persist about letting the movie men stay on for 
weeks  together.  Experts say that it does not  require  guns  to 
scare away wildlife; cameras are evil enough. 

Although this is not meant to be a case for banning cinema  units 
from  using the Nilgiris, there is a clear need to regulate  such 
business ventures. While shootings must not be permitted -  under 
any  circumstance - in wildlife sanctuaries and  national  parks, 
they  may  be  allowed  in  reserve  forests,  but  with  certain 
restrictions.  Prolonged schedules should be avoided. The  Mumbai 
film  company  plans to stay on for about three months,  and  one 
wonders  whether  this is at all wise.  Animals  jealously  guard 
their territory, and if they are forced out of it - and they will 
in  all  probability, because film-making is invariably  din  and 
confusion  -  they  tend  to  become  confused  and  angry.  Also 
perturbing  is  the  fact  that the  men  who  create  dreams  on 
celluloid  usually cause nightmares on the ground they tread  on. 
The  Nilgiris and other natural spots have had to cope  with  the 
mess  that  movie-makers left behind. It can take weeks  for  the 
grass to grow back. The damage elsewhere can be worse. At a  time 
when forests are shrinking - they cover about 10 per cent of  the 
country  today  against  40  per cent a  century  earlier  -  the 
administration  needs to take hard decisions, even if they  knock 
off  the smile from cinema. A blue sky and a green patch of  land 
are perhaps preferable to grease paint and arc lamps. However, in 
the final analysis, is it not time for film-makers and actors  to 
pause and reflect. Most of them are well informed and capable  of 
responsible  behaviour;  it  would seem almost  tragic  if  these 
mortals  were to join poachers and rippers in the destruction  of 
our  environment.  It  is  a sacred treasure  to  behold,  to  be 
preserved for the generations to come.
