
Reforms - Reckoning without labour?


By S. Swaminathan

The  Union Labour Minister, Mr. Satyanarayan Jatiya,  has  talked 
about  the need for a national policy for protecting the jobs  of 
135  million agricultural workers and of millions  of  home-based 
workers  in  the  unorganised  sector. To  the  extent  that  the 
agricultural sector remains largely untouched by the fervour  for 
globalisation, the spectre of joblessness may not be haunting the 
countryside.  On  the contrary a secular diminution  of  seasonal 
availability  of agricultural workers may even be experienced  in 
some agricultural regions in the country. 

But  this picture could be overdrawn given the evidence that  the 
drift  of  labour away from the rural areas  into  the  congested 
cities is continuing without any abatement. But the point made by 
Mr.  Jatiya that about 50 million workers engaged in an array  of 
occupations such as beedi-rolling, weaving, gem cutting,  garment 
making,  papad processing and agarbathi making - representing  an 
economically  disadvantaged  section  of the  population  -  need 
legislative protection is not as simplistic as it sounds. 

Minimalist  legislative efforts in the past, as for  example  the 
Minimum Wages Act, have not always produced the intended benefits 
for the workers. Laxity in enforcement compounded by the economic 
vulnerability of occupations in the unorganised sector has  often 
nullified  the  impact of such well-meaning legislation.  Is  the 
Union  Government  merely  articulating the  desperate  cause  of 
workers   trapped  in  such  occupations  or  is   it   seriously 
considering  the imposition of a formal statutory status  on  the 
informal  sector  in  industry  without  much  thought  for   the 
complexity if not the impracticability of such an approach in  an 
economy which is fast getting absorbed by market forces? 

Whether  it  is the future of the handloom industry  or  that  of 
garment making in the decentralised sector, much more than  legal 
safeguards,  what the workers would need is an integrated  policy 
package which takes care of markets for final products as well as 
the  requirements of supply of raw materials along with those  of 
credit and capital. 

If there is one area of the economy where there is a strong  case 
for subsidies it is that of decentralised production of  consumer 
goods  for mass consumption which would also  ensure  sustainable 
employment for the millions, particularly in the rural areas.  Is 
Mr.  Jatiya  referring to a new subsidy approach  to  the  ``tiny 
sector'' while talking about protection of home-based workers  or 
is he indicating that a variant of minimum wage legislation  will 
be let loose in the unorganised sector?

Seen in the larger context of linking an expansion of  employment 
in   the   organised  sector  with  the  benefits   of   economic  
liberalisation and growth, the situation in India is not all that 
encouraging.  Much more than new jobs which are  being  generated 
(in  the  services sector and in the IT sector), the  jobs  which 
have either been lost or have become redundant in the traditional 
industries  (such as textiles) seem to proclaim the harshness  of 
economic reforms. 

The Western critics of globalisation have no illusions about  the 
growing joblessness inherent in the new paradigm of  development. 
``Jobless  growth''  is not a mere apprehension. It  has  perhaps 
already  become  a  daunting challenge for  policymakers  in  the 
affluent countries. But in the developing countries with  abysmal 
levels of literacy and occupational education, the adverse impact 
of  economic  reforms  (with the axiomatic  creed  of  downsizing 
passing  for  enhancement of competitive  efficiency)  is  coming 
through  in  the form of retrenchment of labour in  all  but  the 
sectors where ``knowledge'' enjoys a premium. 

To   say  that  such  spells  of  unemployment   are   inevitable 
transitional  adjustments  involved  in economic  reforms  is  to 
abandon  the  basic  premise  of all  development  which  is  the 
improvement  in  the living conditions of  the  disadvantaged  in 
society.

Whether  the  hypothesis of global competitive efficiency  of  an 
economy subsuming human justice and compassion is tenable at all, 
might  appear to be too philosophical for architects of  economic 
policy in India and other developing countries. But there can  be 
little doubt that economic ``expansionism'' which marginalises an 
increasing  number of the poor, will not be socially  sustainable 
even if it is misconstrued as being politically manageable. 

It is crucial therefore that the ``reform mindset'' should engage 
itself  increasingly in the challenging task of intertwining  the 
so-called second generation reforms with the process of promoting 
employment  rather than merely reconciling itself to the loss  of 
jobs  in  the  private  and  public  sector  as  a   misperceived 
precondition for global economic integration.

The  vociferous  chorus  of  protest  against  the  attempts   to 
reorganise  the  elephantine monolith called  the  Uttar  Pradesh 
Electricity Board, is, by no means, a totally unexpected eruption 
of labour opposition to economic reforms. Who does not know  that 
our  State  Electricity Boards are financially bankrupt  or  that 
apart  from  the  political game of free  or  heavily  subsidised 
supply  of power to farmers, there are huge losses on account  of 
transmission  and  distribution  apart from  organised  theft  of 
electricity? 

Granting  that  the  thousands of employees  of  the  Electricity 
Boards  are  legitimately perturbed by the fear  of  retrenchment 
arising from the restructuring strategy, should they be given the 
short  shrift  or merely bulldozed  into  accepting  bifurcation, 
trifurcation or whatever of the Electricity Board? 

That  the reform process should not be allowed to be derailed  by 
vested  interests is perhaps a reasonable formulation but to  say 
that  decision-making in such a crucial matter need  not  involve 
labour  at all is neither civilised behaviour for the  management 
(the State Government) nor is it acceptable as part of democratic 
propriety.  Even  the most ardent champion  of  economic  reforms 
cannot  afford  to  subscribe  to the notion  that  a  policy  of 
abridgement   of  labour  can  ever  be  conducive  to   economic 
development. 

Much more than the dialectics of politicised trade unionism, what 
is  at stake is that the reform process cannot compromise on  the 
basic  need  to maintain jobs in the  economy.  Where  industrial 
units (sick or otherwise) cannot be salvaged at all, a safety net 
has to come to the rescue of the workers. To the extent that such 
safety  nets have not yet been put in place, the  reform  process 
already stands discredited.
