
A guide to dealing in demat securities-II


CORPORATE ACTION: Rights - You will receive corporate action  (as 
announced  by the issuing company) for securities held  in  demat 
form.

Procedure:  Cash  corporate action  (dividend,  interest,  etc.): 
Issuer/their   R&T;   agent  directly  forwards   the   depository 
warrant/interest to the depository account holder. NSDL does  not 
handle  funds.  The  issuer/their  R &  T  agent  calculates  the 
benefits  due to you on the basis of ownership data forwarded  by 
NSDL.

In the future, NSDL intends to play a direct role in distribution 
of  cash corporate actions. On a pilot basis, NSDL  had  extended 
the  dividend distribution service to shareholder of  BSES.  NDSL 
had arranged to directly credit the bank account of  shareholders 
holding  share  in demat form. The bank account details  were  as 
provided by shareholders in the depository account opening form.

Non cash corporate action (bonus, rights, etc.): Issuer/their R&T; 
agent  would  arrange  to credit  your  depository  account  with 
bonus/rights securities to the extent of your entitlement on  the 
basis of ownership data forwarded by NSDL.

Points  to remember: Securities lying in the clearing account  of 
to  any corporate benefits. In case securities bought by you  are 
in   your  broker's  clearing  account,  ensure  that  they   are 
transferred to your depository account before book closure/record 
date.

2.  NSDL does not handle cash corporate actions. In case of  non-
receipt  of  the  same, contact the issuer/their  R&T;  agent.  In 
future, when NSDL handles cash corporate actions, you may contact 
NSDL in case of non-receipt of the same.

3.  In case you wish to avail of the ECS facility  for  receiving 
your  cash  corporate  action, you may do  so  by  informing  the 
issuer/their  R  &  T  agent  (provided  the  issuer  gives  this 
facility).  You will need to inform the company even if you  were 
availing of this facility for your physical securities which were 
dematerialised.

4.  Ensure that you give your bank particulars correctly  in  the 
account  opening  form.  This would be printed  on  the  dividend 
warrant.

In  case of right/ bonus entitlement irrespective of the form  of 
your  existing holding, you have to intimate issuer/ their R &  T 
agent  your  choice of the form (physical/ demat)  in  which  you 
would  prefer  to receive your right / bonus securities  and  the 
client  ID  and DP ID of the account in which you would  like  to 
have  the securities credited. Although this  depository  account  
can  be  different  from  the  account  in  which  your  existing 
securities  are held, they should be in the same  combination  of 
names  as the depository account where your  existing  securities 
are  held.  If there is any mistake in  your  depository  account 
details  mentioned in the rights application/  intimation  letter 
indicating  the  choice of form of bonus  securities,  you  would 
receive physical securities directly from the issuer / their R  & 
T agent.

In  case you have not intimated issuer / their R & T  agent  your 
choice of the form (physical/ demat) in which you would prefer to 
receive your right / bonus securities, you will get your non-cash 
corporate benefits in the form of your original holdings.

In case of rights issue, the rights issue form will be  forwarded 
by the issuer / their R & T agent.

In case of problem in credit in your depository account,  contact 
your  DP. If they fail to resolve your problem, you  may  contact 
NSDL.

Transaction statement

Rights: For each account opened with your DP, you will receive  a 
`statement of account' from your DP on a quarterly basis. If your 
account  has a debit/ credit during the intervening  period,  you 
will receive a `statement of account' within 15 days of the debit 
/ credit to your account. 

Points to remember

You can arrange with your DP to get the `statement of account' at 
shorter intervals. They may charge for this facility.

In case of any discrepancy in the `statement of account', contact 
your  DP.  If they fail to resolve your problem you  may  contact 
NSDL.

The  `statement of account' is your proof of holding and in  case 
you lose it you would not lose your holding.

General

Charges: NSDL does not charge investor directly. Its charges  are 
to the DP and these include:

* Custody charge of 0.01 per cent per annum (Rs. 10 for every Rs. 
100,000)  of the average market value of securities held  in  the 
account,  subject  to  an overall ceiling based  on  the  average 
holdings in demat form with the DP.

*  Settlement  charge  of 0.02 per cent (Rs.  20  for  every  Rs. 
100,000) of the market value of the securities being  transferred 
from  the  selling broker to the clearing  corporation/  clearing 
house  of the stock exchange and 0.02 per cent (Rs. 20 for  every  
Rs.  100,000)  of  the  market  value  of  the  securities  being 
transferred from the clearing corporation/ clearing house of  the 
stock exchange to the buying broker.

*  Settlement  charges  of 0.02 per cent (Rs. 20  for  every  Rs. 
100,000) of the market value of securities to the DP of the buyer 
and  seller  for trades that are not cleared and settled  at  the 
stock exchanges, but, settled between two persons directly.

*  Rematerialisation charges of 0.10 per cent (Rs. 100 for  every 
Rs.  100,000)  of  the  market value of  securities  or  Rs.  10, 
whichever is higher. DP has athe freedom to decide his own charge 
structure for the service rendered by them.

Public issues: You can opt for allotment directly in demat  form, 
provided the company has joined NSDL and gives you this facility.

Pledge: You can pledge your demat holdings.

Lending/  borrowing: You can lend/ borrow demat securities  to  / 
from an authorised intermediary.

Freezing  of account: You can freeze your account any time.  When 
your  account is frozen, no transactions will be made  from  your 
account  until  you  unfreeze  it. Further,  you  also  have  the 
facility to freeze your account for debits only. In such a  case, 
credits will automatically flow to your account.

Closure of account: In case your want to close your account  with 
one  DP, you can do so by shifting your holding to  a  depository 
account with another DP or by rematerialising your holding.  NSDL 
does not charge for this. You can rematerialise part or whole  of 
your holdings any time.

Transmission:  If the account holder passes away, the DP  of  the 
account holder would be able to process the transmission of these 
securities  to the legal heirs. You do not have to take  up  with 
ach  of the issuer/their R&T; agent. NSDL does not charge  its  DP 
for transmission.

Nomination:  You have the facility to appoint a nominee for  your 
depository  account. However, your can nominate only  one  person 
per account. Please note that nomination facility is allowed only 
in case of securities held singly or held jointly to a maximum of 
two jointholders.

Change  in  demographic  details:  in  case  of  any  change   in 
demographic details provided in the account opening form, you can 
contact  your DP. The DP will ensure that the change  is  updated 
for all holdings credited in your account.

Investor  grievance: In case of any unresolved dispute with a  DP 
you  can  contact NSDL for resolution of your  grievance  at  the 
following  address: Officer-in-charge, Investor Grievances  Cell, 
National  Securities  Depository  Ltd.,  Tradeworld,  5th  floor,  
Kamala  Mills Compound, Lower Parel, Mumbai 400 013. Phone:  022-
4972964-70,        Fax:       022-4972993/4976351.        E-mail: 
relations@nsdl.co.in.

Please ensure to provide your client ID, DP id & DRN (DRN in case 
of grievance related to demat) in your correspondence.

(Concluded)
