
A worrisome trend 


THE LAST four decades of the present millennium have seen a spate 
of  mergers and amalgamations on a global scale, involving  major 
corporations and billions of dollars. Indian corporates were  not 
free  from this 'mania' - the abortive attempt of Mr. Swraj  Paul 
to take over Ashok Leyland and Escorts comes immediately to mind. 
The  last  successful and painless instance  is  Hindustan  Lever 
`gobbing'  up  in turn Liptons, Brooke Bond  and  finally  Pond's 
India.  The  merger  mania,  of late,  has  penetrated  even  the 
orthodox and conservative portals of auditing and legal firms  in 
the U.S. and is sure to percolate to India in the new millennium.

In  an  article  with the apt caption "Ethics  be  damned,  Let's 
merge''  in  the August 23-30, 1999 issue of Business  Week,  Mr. 
Jeffrey  E.  Garten,  Dean of the Yale  School  of  Management,'' 
describes  the  portents and pitfalls of a  marriage  between  an 
auditing firm and a legal firm. He gives three compelling factors 
for this itch to merge, namely:

(i)  A strong demand for sophisticated financial  and  retirement 
planning  for  a one-stop shopping (akin to  our  own  one-window 
clearance) for both legal and accounting advices.

(ii) Penchant of multinational companies to rely on a few service 
firms to handle all their global needs, and more important.

(iii)  The  voracious appetite of big accounting  firms  -  their 
obsession  to  leverage  their accounting  relationship  to  help 
clients do other things - plan their corporate strategies,  build 
and  manage  their information technology system  and  now  solve 
client's legal problems.

The article goes on to succinctly point out the difficulties  and 
dangers if such mergers do take place, namely:

(a)   Conflict  of  interests  -  undermining  of   two   crucial 
`underpinnings'   of  America's  market  economy  -   independent 
auditing  and  sound  legal advice.  He  quotes  approvingly  the 
observations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission - the 
auditing  profession  must  be more than  just  another  business 
selling  a product or service. It has an obligation to  not  only 
disclose  financial  information  to investors but  also  to  put 
investors' interests above those of the auditor's clients or even 
their  own employees. On the other hand lawyers are  confidential 
advisers and advocates with primary allegiance to the clients.

(b)  Business priorities - Management consulting and  legal  work 
produce  fatter  margins  than  accounting.  The  all   important 
auditing  business  is likely to get subordinated  (True  of  our 
country  also - published annual accounts reveal  that  auditors, 
remuneration include a big chunk for non-auditing services).

(c)  Increasing challenge to effectively manage  themselves.  Mr. 
Garten cites the example of PricewaterhouseCoopers with 1.55 lakh 
employees spread over 150 countries and asks us to imagine  their 
problems of co-ordinating disparate businesses, implementing  new 
strategies,  monitoring  quality control  and  melding  different 
professional cultures and compensation systems.

Whether  the  proposal  to merge legal  and  auditing  firms  get 
statutory  approval  or not in the U.S., might seem of  not  much 
relevance  to  India now. But it is a portent not to  be  trifled 
with  at  the same time. The heady and exciting days  of  India's 
freedom movement when one could say with his head held high  that 
'what  Bengal  does today, the rest of India is  sure  to  follow 
tomorrow' are all but extinct. Alas, we now meekly submit to  and 
ape what the powerful vested interests in the West dictate to us, 
and this is noticeable in the attitude and approach of our  three 
statutory bodies viz. "The Institute of Chartered Accountants  of 
India  (ICAI),  the Institute of Cost and  Works  Accountants  of 
India  (ICWAI) and the Institute of Company Secretaries of  India 
(ICSI).

Let  us  take the instance of the big five in  the  international 
accounting and consulting field, namely, Pricewaterhouse Coopers, 
KMG  Peat  Marwich, Arthur Anderson, Ernst & Young  and  Deloitte 
Touche  Tohmatsv.  Each one of them, either on their  own  or  in 
collaboration with willing Indian partners, has already a footing 
in our country. What is more worrisome is that they have captured 
the consultancy area. Their advice is being sought more and more, 
notwithstanding there are equally or more capable Indian  experts 
in  the  fields of information technology  and  restructuring  of 
corporate  goals!  Many  Indian  corporate  giants  spread  their 
tentacles   too  far  and  too  wide,  venturing   into   unknown 
territories,  only  to  burn  their  fingers.  The  uniform   and 
predictable  advice  in  all  cases,  mostly  from  the   foreign 
consulting firms, has been to spin off the non-core business  and 
to  concentrate  on  the core area!  The  fat  consultancy  fees, 
unnecessarily are pocketed by these foreign consultants.

These firms are barred from entering the auditing field, as  only 
a member of the ICAI can undertake such assignment. But every law 
has its loophole. They will recruit Indian chartered  accountants 
and  through  their willing assistance, overcome  this  seemingly 
impenetrable  fortress, also. The move by a small  but  important 
section  of the legal fraternity in India to get foreign  lawyers 
entry to Indian courts is just the beginning of a catastrophe. So 
could  be  the  case if the merger of law  and  accounting  firms 
became a reality in the West.

In this context, the three statutory bodies, ICAI, ICWAI and ICSI 
have  important and urgent roles to play. They have to  shed  off 
their  own narrow mindedness, and come out of their cocoons,  and 
think  of  the  country's  interests.  Each  is  now  trying   to 
desperately fend off the others from what they think is their own 
sacred  area. Complementary but not competitive should  be  their 
watchword.  Powers  that  be are feted and  fawned  upon  at  all  
possible places and at all possible times, as they are  creatures 
of  government statutes and as such even their areas of work  are 
demarcated  by  the Government. one-upmanship  is  noticeable  in 
their ever changing syllabi and regulations. They are members  of 
international bodies and attend their meetings regularly (foreign 
jaunts?) but original contribution, as such, has been conspicuous 
by its absence.

This  is  not  the place to analyse in  detail  what  ails  these 
institutions  or to prescribe remedies to energise them.  Suffice 
it  to  say  that government control, growth  in  the  number  of 
students  and  members  making them unwieldy  and  limitation  of 
tenure  of the President to just one year, are the  main  causes. 
The  President, on his election, has to undertake  the  customary 
"Bharat  Yatra,'' to receive felicitations from  chapters  dotted 
all over the country. He has to meet government officials. He has 
to  attend international meets and he has to worry about his  own 
career.  Where is the time to sit down and direct the affairs  of 
the institute in a proper and authoritative way!

A solution seems to be to merge the three institutes and then  to 
have  three  or four separate units, with syllabus  and  area  of 
specialisation of each one of them not desperate from the others. 
The  syllabus and training of the 'consolidated,  institutes  for 
the  first two years could be common for all their  students.  In 
the  third  and  later years each student can  take  up  his  own 
speciality.  Like  the Medical Council of India there  can  be  a 
controlling authority to steer them in the right direction.

Am I stirring an hornets' nest? Hope not!

S. Balakrishnan
