
Voltas' CP gets A1+ rating 


ICRA has retained the A1+ (pronounced A one plus) rating assigned 
to  the  Rs.  25  crores commercial  paper  programme  of  Voltas 
Limited.  The  rating indicates highest safety. The  prospect  of 
timely repayment of debt/obligation is the best. The rating takes 
into account the comfortable liquidity position and the company's 
improved  financial risk profile arising from its exit  from  the 
white goods and agro-chemicals manufacturing activities, and  its 
renewed   focus   on  its  traditional   activities   like   air-
conditioning,  engineering and chemical trading. The rating  also 
takes  into  account Voltas' efforts in  improving  profitability 
through  cost reduction and effective utilisation of idle  assets 
such as real estate. 

After the company sold its white goods division and agro-chemical 
plant,  it  utilised a part of the sales proceeds to  repay  debt 
obligations relating to the divested divisions. This resulted  in 
an  improvement  in  gearing levels (Total Debt  /  Tangible  Net 
Worth),  which declined to 1.24 times as on March 31,  1999  from 
2.28  times  as  of  March 31, 1998.  The  company  invested  the 
remainder of the sales proceeds in liquid securities, which  were 
sold  during the course of 1999 to meet operational  requirements 
and debt obligations maturing in mid 1999.

The reliance on working capital finance has also reduced, as  its 
current  activities are not as working capital intensive  as  the 
erstwhile  white  goods division, and also because of a  fall  in 
turnover of Rs. 984.28 crores in 1998-99 from Rs. 1,099 crores in 
1997-98, on account of the divestment of divisions, and depressed 
in some of its engineering divisions, following a weak market for 
capital  goods. The company was able to post a net profit of  Rs. 
12.79  crores in 1998-99 as against a loss of Rs. 9.99 crores  in 
1997-98  mainly due to significant extraordinary  income  arising 
form the divestment exercise. 

Though   the  room  air  conditioning  division's   turnover   is 
marginally  lower in the current financial year (till  date),  as 
compared  to levels in the same period of last year,  its  mining 
equipment  division  is executing a large order from  Coal  India 
Limited.  This order is expected to generate high returns  during 
the  medium term. The efforts at cost reduction in areas such  as 
employee  costs, through an on-going VRS plan, are also  expected 
to improve its overall cost structure in the future. 

Sundaram Brake Linings

ICRA  has  revised  upwards  the rating  of  the  Rs.  7.9  crore 
debenture  programme of Sundaram Brake Lining, from LAA- to  LAA. 
The  revised  rating also indicates high safety with  regards  to 
payment of principal and interest. 

The   revised  rating  for  the  long-term  instrument   reflects  
improvement in operating performance derived from the recovery in 
the  auto sector, focused strategy of the company  in  increasing 
exports  and  success in cutting costs. The  rating  change  also 
factors  in the decline in the level of financial risk  owing  to 
lower debt level and improved cash flows. 

SBLL  has been successful in achieving significant export  growth 
of 39 per cent in 1998-99 which compensated for the slower growth 
in the domestic segments and posting an overall growth of 16  per 
cent  in  operating income. The export growth, driven  by  a  two 
pronged  strategy  of  expanding operations  in  its  traditional 
markets  as  well  as entering new  countries,  has  reduced  its 
reliance on the domestic friction products market. 

Cholamandalam Finance

ICRA has assigned an MAAA rating to the Rs. 50 crores medium term 
debenture  programme  of  Cholamandalam  Investment  and  Finance 
Company  Limited (CIFCO). The MAAA range assigned by ICRA to  the 
fixed  deposits  and  the  existing Rs.  100  crore  medium  term 
debenture  programme  of CIFCO have been  retained.  The  ratings 
indicate highest safety. 

The  company  has  been  able  to  improve  its  corporate  asset 
portfolio  by attracting better clients offering fine  rates.  It 
has also reduced its exposure to the ailing textile sector. CIFCO 
has  maintained  the quality of its retail  assets  by  following 
stringent client appraisal norms. Its asset quality is  reflected 
in its high collection efficiency and low level on NPAs. 

CIFCO  reduced its dependence on high cost retail deposits, as  a 
result  further  diversifying its funding mix  and  reducing  its 
interest  cost. The gearing has remained at low levels and  stood 
at  2.9 times as on June 30, 1999. The diversified  funding  base 
and  low  gearing limit the financial risk of  the  company.  The 
interest spreads continued to be under pressure and resulted in a 
moderate fall in profitability. 

Godavari Fertilizers

ICRA  has assigned an A1+ rating to the Rs. 25  crore  commercial 
programme of Godavari Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited. The rating 
indicates highest safety while the prospect of timely payment  of 
debt/obligation is the best. 

The  rating factors in the strong market position of the  company 
in  Andhra Pradesh and the expected reduction  in  transportation 
time and cost. Savings are expected from the commissioning of its 
ship  unloading facility at Kakinada port along with  a  pipeline 
system  for  transhipment of raw material from the  port  to  the 
plant in this fiscal. 

GFCL  is  a  joint venture promoted by the  A.P.  Government  and 
IFFCO. The company manufactures DAP and complex fertilizers 20  : 
20 at Kakinada in East Godavari district and imports the key  raw  
materials, phosphoric acid and ammonia. The company has  recorded 
profit in all years since 1994 and has also been able to  achieve 
increased  sales  from 3.2 lakh mt to 7.16 lakh  mt  during  this 
period. For 1998-99, it recorded a turnover of Rs.905 crores with 
an operating profit before depreciation, interest and tax of  Rs. 
55 crores. 

Dhunseri Tea

The  A plus rating assigned to the Rs. 11 crore non-  convertible 
debenture programme of Dhunseri Tea & Industries Limited has been 
reaffirmed.

The rating reflects a comfortable market position in the domestic 
tea  industry,  favourable performance on  operating  parameters, 
comfortable   capital  structure  and  moderate  financial   risk 
profile.  These  factors are, however, tempered by  the  volatile 
nature  of the industry and increasing competitive  pressures  in 
the packet tea segment. While the rating also factors  Dhunseri's 
proposed  investments in the greenfield petrochemical project  to 
be  implemented by an affiliate company, higher than  anticipated 
investments  in the project could have a negative impact  on  the 
company's risk profile. 

Dhunseri Tea and Industries (Dhunseri) is the flagship company of 
the Calcutta based S. L. Dhanuka group. The promoters proposes to 
implement  a  greenfield petrochemical project  at  Haldia,  West 
Bengal, in collaboration with Zimmer AG of Germany. 

Dhunseri is also expected to make some equity investments in  the 
proposed joint venture, on account of being the flagship  company 
of  the  group. During the 15 month period ended March  1999,  it 
reported a net profit of Rs. 8.7 crores on an operating income of 
Rs. 88 crores. 

Highway Cycle Industries

A  rating of P1+ has been assigned to the Rs. 9 crore  commercial 
paper  programme  of  Highway  Cycle  Industries  Limited  (HCIL) 
(enhanced from Rs. 6 crores). 

The  rating reflects the company's strong linkage with  the  Hero 
group,  access to business and financial support from  cash  rich 
group  companies  and its dominant market position  in  component 
supplies to Hero Honda and Hero Cycles, and its steady  financial 
position  characterised  by  a  strong  growth  in  turnover  and 
moderate  interest coverage (as measured by PBDIT/  Interest  and 
Finance  Charges). The ratings also factor in the high  level  of 
customer concentration in the company's revenue mix. 

HCIL  is  engaged mainly in the manufacture and sale  of  bicycle 
free  wheels  and  die  cast  aluminium  components,  which   are 
manufactured  by  the  company's Ludhiana  division  and  Sunbeam 
Castings  division respectively. During 1999, it  registered  net 
sales of Rs. 142.69 crores and PAT of Rs. 4.12 crores.  

Compiled by Shanthi Kannan
