
HRD: Self-development holds key 


The  first  characteristic of self-development  is  thinking  for 
oneself. It requires an open mind and involves personal change  - 
new   abilities,  different  outlooks  and  new  feelings,   says 
M.S.S.Varadan.

AT ANY given time, hundreds of managers all over the country  are 
participating  in  one  are the other  training  and  development 
programme. All the same, questions continue to be asked about the 
efficacy  of  these  programmes. Doubts are raised  many  a  time 
whether the training programmes result in any improvement in  the 
work place or merely turn out to be good social get-togethers  in 
nice  locations, with some new fad or buzz words  acquired!  What 
then should be the approach to make training really useful to the 
individual  and the organisation he or she works for?  These  and 
other  connected  issues are to be discussed in  the  forthcoming 
National   Convention   of  Indian  Society  for   Training   and 
Development  from  January 19 to 21 on the theme  ``Training  for 
Transformation".

Common defect

Many  HRD approaches now in practice fails to deliver  the  goods 
due  to  one common factor. They regard and treat  people  as  an 
object rather than a subject of the development process. In other 
words,  an  engineering  approach  is  taken  to  `engineer'  the 
person's development. The plan for his development is drawn  very 
carefully  in  a  structured way with everyone  else  around  him 
deciding  as to how he should be developed, excepting the  person 
himself! 

In fact, Douglas McGregor in his timeless classic `Human side  of 
the  enterprise'  points out that what is needed instead  is  the 
`agricultural  approach', wherein the soil is first prepared  and 
proper  seeding  done  to enable a good  crop  later.  Similarly, 
proper conditions have to be created in an organisation in  which 
the  managers  are keen to develop themselves.  In  the  ultimate 
analysis,  it has to be recognised that all development is  self-
development. As the common saying goes, ``You can take a horse to 
water   but   cannot  make  it  drink".  Every   person   has   a 
responsibility  for his own personal development. This can  never 
be  substituted by entrusting the responsibility for  development 
of  personnel  to the HRD manager of an organisation!  When  this 
approach   is  resorted  to,  then  naturally  the  results   are 
disappointing!  Real development takes place when  organisational 
efforts  are directed to increase a person's  responsibility  for 
his  own development followed by direct assistance to  those  who 
are  keen  to  develop themselves. Such an  approach  can  ensure 
learning new skills; improved job performance; making the best of 
themselves;  career  progression; self-satisfaction  and  greater 
recognition.

Self-development is hard work

The  first  characteristic of self-development  is  thinking  for 
oneself. It requires an open mind and involves personal change  - 
new  abilities, different outlooks and new feelings. The  classic 
ILO publication on the subject classifies development in terms of 
thinking, feeling and `willing to' processes of self-development. 
Thinking concerns our ideas, beliefs, concepts, theories. Feeling 
includes our emotions and moods. ``Willing to is concerned"  with 
action  - what we really are prepared to do (or are not  prepared 
to  do)!  Four main areas of development identified  are  healthy 
outlook, skills, action and sense of identity. If one possesses a 
healthy mind he is neither dogmatic and too full of his own views 
nor  over-reliant  on  others ideas. One should  be  prepared  to 
listen  to  others  even if he is not  in  agreement  with  them. 
Healthy  feelings  also  relate to  striking  a  balance  between 
professional  life and home life, thinking activities  and  doing 
activities  and  material interest and spiritual  interests.  The 
ultimate aim should be to have peace with oneself.

In  terms of skills, the primary one relates to the  job  skills, 
both current and future. The technical part is the easier one  to 
manage. The more difficult is the social skills and communication 
abilities.

Getting  things done requires ability to take initiatives and  to 
be  pro-active,  that  is, take steps  rather  than  waiting  for 
something  to happen or to be told what to do. As the great  Sage 
Thiruvalluvar  puts  it  in `Kural', he who  falls  a  victim  to 
inaction,  and does not labour strenuously, first  meets  censure 
from  friends  but will finally have to put  up  with  everyone's 
contempt.

Sense of identity relates to the acceptance of self, in spite  of 
weaknesses,  but  utilising  the strengths.  This  acceptance  is 
accompanied by knowledge and understanding of oneself and also by 
inner drive, inner direction and a purpose in life. It is not  of 
course a complacent acceptance.

Stakeholders in self-development

Interestingly, for a person working in an organisation there  are 
number of others who are affected by one's own  self-development. 
For  example, the subordinates would be immensely happy seeing  a 
boss  develop  on  the right  lines!  Customers  particularly  in 
service sector who come into direct contact and who are  affected 
by  the attitudes of those who serve, would only be too happy  to 
feel  the positive developments. In fact, since  an  organisation 
consists   of  a  number  of  people  working   together,   one's 
development is welcomed by all around, excepting perhaps only  by 
his competitor! The stakeholders map is given below:

There   are  a  number  of  methods  available  for   one's   own 
development.  Reading,  particularly  the  latest  journals   and 
attending  lectures  on recent topics  arranged  by  professional  
associations could help one keep up-to-date. Writing for journals 
and  offering  to  share  experiences would  also  help.  On  the 
implementation side, trying out new things and taking initiatives 
in  various  aspects would be useful. Also,  volunteering  to  be 
members of various task groups would give invaluable  experience. 
Reflecting  on  things that happen and listening to  others  view 
points and pondering over them would be fruitful.

Web-based education

With the ever increasing information technology tools  available, 
it is now possible to get educated through web-based information. 
Even  web-based distance education courses are now being  offered 
for the benefit of those who would like to avail of it.  Internet 
in  its  own way offers a lot of information for  explorers.  For 
self-development, all this is an ideal situation to work with.

There are also questionnaires which helps one to explore  oneself 
and get feedback on his strong points and weak areas. These  days 
one  comes across useful instruments like  personality  profiling 
which  give  a  whole range of observations based  on  a  set  of 
questionnaires. The observations are often well worth reflecting.

Even  on  the recent concept of emotional intelligence  of  which 
there   are  five  components,  namely,   self-awareness,   self-
regulation,  motivation, empathy and networking skills,  one  can 
get  his  own score on this by filling the questionnaire  on  the 
computer and getting result also immediately.

Such instruments help one to get feedback for himself or herself. 
But  the  more  important point is to reflect on  this  and  also 
explore  with those close to the person who would have known  him 
well.   Others  can  help  a  person  by  giving   feedback,   by 
questioning,  sharing, discussing and helping one to reflect  and 
think.  Who  are these `others'? Usually, they  can  be  friends, 
colleagues and fellow learners. It is good to form a small circle 
of such people who are like minded in terms of development. Often 
one  is  known by the company he keeps. The  importance  of  good 
company of friends or colleagues cannot be over emphasised.

The  future belongs to knowledge workers. The  famous  management 
author  Peter Drucker in his book on `Management  challenges  for 
the 21st century' has identified managing oneself as an important 
challenge for the knowledge worker. He states that more and  more 
people and most knowledge workers will have to manage themselves. 
They  will  have  to place themselves where  they  can  make  the 
greatest contribution; they have to learn to develop  themselves. 
He states that knowledge workers face the following new demands.

*  They  have to ask: Who am I? what are my strengths? How  do  I 
work?

* They have to ask: where do I belong?

* They have to ask: what is my contribution? 

* They have to take relationships responsibility and 

* They have to plan for the second half of their lives.

Peter Drucker even suggests that there could be a parallel career 
in  the  `second  half' of one's life  to  work  with  non-profit 
organisations!

All  the foregoing does not take away the responsibility  of  the 
organisation to assists the developmental process. The nature  of 
this however is best described by the following Arabic proverb.

He who knows not, and knows not that he knows not, is a fool-shun 
him;

He who knows not, and knows that he knows not, is  ignorant-teach 
him;

He who knows, and knows not that he knows, is asleep - wake him;

But  he who knows, and knows that he knows, is a wise  man-follow 
him.
