
HRD Counselling


An interview with, ANTO VINCENT, 

Vice President, HR, Ford India Ltd, Chennai.

Q:  Apart  from  the  technical expertise,  what  are  the  other 
qualifications you look for in a candidate applying for a job?

Ans.:  We follow the principle ``Hire for attitude and train  for 
skill'',  so the candidate should possess the suitable  qualities 
to fit our working conditions. For example, he or she has to be a 
team player, they need to be innovative, with the ability to take 
initiatives  at the work place. These primary personality  traits 
are very important next to their technical aptitude.

Q:  How  important  is  personal  presentation,  as  to  how  the 
candidate dresses, or how they walk and sit?

Ans.:  See, we follow a process called the  "Assessment  Centre", 
which  is  a very structured approach for  hiring.  The  selected 
candidates  are  put  through a series of  written  tests,  group 
activities,  personal interviews, work place simulation and  case 
study.  There is also an absolute score which a candidate has  to 
achieve  to be taken into consideration. There are three to  four 
trained  assessors who are constantly observing all of  them  and 
recording their observations without making any judgements.  When 
the  whole  exercise  is  over  then  they  sit  down  and   draw 
conclusions  from all their pooled observations.  Actually  there 
are  two  parts, one where they observe the candidates  and  then 
draw  conclusions from their notations. So how they dress,  walk, 
and the gestures they use are noted down during this exercise, in 
an  objective manner but all these are secondary factors. We  are 
not particular that the candidate wear suits or ties because  the 
atmosphere in here is not very formal.

Q:  Do  you  have  any interview  specific  expectations  from  a 
candidate?

Ans.: During the interview we encourage free interaction, and the 
candidates  do tell us what they will be able to bring  into  the 
company.  When  they want to know about the company  then  we  do 
answer their questions. Pay scales are not discussed right  here, 
that is done only after the candidate has been selected from  the 
``Assessment Centre''.

Q: Do you for certain posts like for example, technicians, prefer 
men over women or do you have any other kind of preferences while 
hiring?

Ans.: We are an "Equal opportunity employer", which means that we 
have  absolutely  on bias and stress on  diversity.  However,  in 
certain  areas in the job market there is a concentration of  men  
and  very few qualified women. In those cases we like  to  employ 
the  women  who are equally capable and suited for  the  job.  So 
there isn't any kind of discrimination involved, in fact, we have 
many  excellent women technicians in our plant. Merit  and  merit 
alone will determine the candidate's chances.

Q:  Okay, then do you have additional facilities for  your  women 
employees who may have to stay back and work late?

Ans.:  We provide transportation to all our employees.  According 
to  the  Factory  Act, women employees cannot be  asked  to  work 
beyond five in the evening, so they do not do the night shift and 
if  at  all they stay back late to complete their jobs  they  are 
dropped back by company transport.

Q: What are your job related expectations from the candidate?

Ans.:  It is mainly job specified, they will expected to  fulfill 
the  job  requirements  at  the  same  time  should  possess  the 
potential for growth, otherwise they become stagnant. They should 
also  be  flexible,  as  we  do  not  have  definite  borders  or 
boundaries.  For  example,  many of our  managers  do  their  own 
correspondence and not every senior person has a secretary.

Q: Being an MNC do your recruits meet global standards?

Ans.:  I  can  confidently say that my  workers  definitely  meet 
global standards. Nearly 50% of my employees have gone abroad and 
are now implementing the latest technology in this plant.

Q: What about the cultural differences?

Ans.:  After  a candidate has been confirmed I talk  to  him  for 
about  an  hour briefing him about the culture of Ford.  So  that 
there is no conflict and this helps him to adjust to our mode  of 
working and till now we haven't had any problems in this field.

Q:  To  wrap  up,  can you  highlight  the  five  most  important 
qualities  a candidate needs to possess to become a part  of  the 
Ford family?

Ans.:  The  top five I look for are, a) technical  expertise,  b) 
team  player,  c) quick learner, d) leadership qualities  and  e) 
good communication abilities.

MALINI SURYANARAYANAN
