
Powered by the passion for perfection


Post-liberalisation,  the automobile industry in India has  grown 
by  leaps and bounds, especially the two-wheeler  segment.  While 
Maruti  800 has changed the face of the Indian  roadscape,  newer 
and   sleeker  cars  dominate  the  elite  mindscape.  Jobs   are 
proliferating essentially for those into AutoCAD\CAM.

However,  what has really revolutionised the Indian roadscape  in 
the  early days of liberalisation almost two decades ago  is  the 
Maruti  800, the 'family car'. It sounded the deathknell for  the 
old  warhorses - Ambassador, Fiat and Standard. The Maruti had  a 
distinct advantage over other new entrants, it being the earliest 
bird  on  the  scene. With the  arrival  of  competition,  Maruti 
shifted  gear,  but  its early lead placed it  in  a  comfortable 
position.

It  is  actually  the two-wheeler market  which  is  the  fastest 
growing.  In this segment, the 100 cc bikes kick- started a  mini 
revolution  with the Kinetic Honda heralding female  emancipation 
in the smaller cities.

With this boom, it is inevitable that jobs multiply, creating  an 
array  of  opportunities  for  skilled  and  trained   automobile 
engineers. The market looks bright now with recession easing.  An 
educated  estimation  indicates  that  the  industry,  with   its 
ancillaries, employs over 25 lakh people at all levels.

The  different divisions in an automobile unit broadly  are:  (i) 
R&D; (ii) Production (iii) Materials, and (iv) Maintenance,  apart 
from   other   common  departments  like   Accounts,   Personnel, 
Administration, HRD etc.

The  R&D;  Section:  This is the creative hub  of  the  unit,  the 
storehouse  of  ideas  for  the  design  and  manufacture  of  an 
automobile. The idea is transferred from paper to screen. Various 
facets  are  factored  in during research  like  ergonomics  (the 
comfort   levels),  the  aerodynamics  (wind  resistance),   body 
sturdiness, fuel efficiency, pick-up, accessories etc. R&D; in the 
four-wheeler  market  is  a cutting edge  specialist  job.  Here, 
autodesign   engineers   have  exciting   openings.   AutoCAD/CAM 
(Computer-aided  design  and manufacture)  courses  from  reputed 
institutions  would be useful for those seeking a career in  this 
field.

Production: This is the core of an automobile unit. Most jobs are 
in this area, mainly for mechanical, electrical and metallurgical 
engineers. The sub-divisions here are (i) Dye casting (ii)  Press 
shop  (iii) Machine shop (iv) Quality control and  assurance  (v) 
Assembly section, and (vi) Paint shop.

Dye  Casting: Engineers specialised in metallurgy are  needed  in 
this section. 

Press  Shop:  Various  pressed components  are  manufactured  and 
mechanical  engineers  are  required in this area  which  is  the 
largest in the unit.

Machine   Shop:   Machine  components  manufactured   here   need 
mechanical engineers.

Assembly   Section:  Automobile  engineers,  process   engineers, 
mechanical  and electrical engineers are required here where  the 
cars\scooters are assembled.

Paint Shop: Usually needs workers with supervisors to oversee the 
process.

Quality Control and Assurance: In this section, checking is  done 
of  various raw materials till they are converted  into  finished 
products  ready for assembly. After the assembly and painting  is 
done  and the vehicle is ready, a final test is done here  before 
sending  the  product  to the despatch section.  QC  experts  are 
essential in all automotive factories.

Materials:  Managers with technical backgrounds are  required  in 
this  area.  The various sub-sections under this  head  are:  (i) 
Purchase  (ii)  Stores (iii) Warehouse and  Logistics,  and  (iv) 
Ancillaries.

These  areas  do not require engineers, and  those  qualified  in 
these fields can hope for employment.

Maintenance:  This is the service wing of the industry.  Ensuring 
the   proper   running   of   the   vehicles   is   their    job. 
Mechanical/Automobile/Electrical engineers are posted here.

Utilities: Power engineers, instrumentation specialists,  service 
personnel and environmental engineers are in demand here.

There  is  also a huge market of dealers, showroom  managers  and 
assistants,  and service centres. These are mostly  non-technical 
areas.  A large part of the industry now pivots  around  customer 
relations  executives whose job it is to maintain good  relations 
with  the customers and enhance the image of the  companies  they 
work for. People with good PR and communication skills with basic 
technical knowledge are needed here. Marketing and sales offer by 
far the largest opportunities.

Trends: One of the main beneficiaries of the Central Government's 
liberalisation  policies  has been the automobile  industry.  De-
licensing  and  foreign collaborations have  changed  this  vital 
sector.  From a dozen car models in 1995, there may be  something 
like  50  by  the end of this year. These  models  are  meant  to 
satisfy the requirements of the middle class and upper class. The 
Planning  Commission  has  estimated  a  growth  in  demand  from 
2,10,000 vehicles in 1994-95 to 3,00,000 vehicles in 2001.

In response to the projected growth, the auto components industry 
is expected to increase its production to around $ 6.0 billion by 
the   end  of  2000  by  supplying  not  only  to   new   vehicle 
manufacturers, but also to export markets. To reach this level of 
production,  investment in the auto component sector is  expected 
to go up to over $ 2.7 billion by the end of 2000. With this kind 
of   expansion,  opportunities  are  growing  for  aspirants   in 
virtually all fields.

VANIT SETHI

(with statistical inputs by J. V. Ramana)
