
A strategic approach for implementation 


The  strong  positive  factors such as growing  web  usage,  well 
evolved IP standards, rapid application development tools, single 
market  place, global reach and Euro make the organisations  feel 
confident  of e-commerce, say Sendur Chelvi Madhavan and  Sridhar 
Chandrasekar.

EVERY new technology introduced in this world has transformed the 
way  business  is  conducted  - and now, it is  the  turn  of  e-
commerce. Mr. Alvin Toffler, the famous futurologist predicted  a 
few  decades  ago that the new networked  digital  economy  would 
drive and change the 21st century and today e-commerce is  making 
it true. The proliferation of the new "infonomics" is forcing the 
traditional  assumptions of economic theory to be rewritten.  The 
customer  interaction  with business is  being  transformed.  The 
"Amazon   effect"   is  driving   well-established   "skyscraper" 
corporations to build attractive online shopping malls. 

The  corporate  world is feeling the pressure -  from  customers, 
partners  and  even  the shareholders -  to  rapidly  develop  e-
commerce capability. The strong positive factors such as  growing 
web   usage,  well  evolved  IP  standards,   rapid   application 
development  tools,  single market place, global reach  and  Euro 
make  the  organisations  feel confident of  e-commerce.  The  IT 
industry  is  responding  favourably  by  throwing  up  effective 
application development tools every other day. The whole world is 
witnessing an e-commerce explosion, which is likely to  intensify 
in the millennium.

Businesses  cannot  succeed in their  e-commerce  venture  unless 
careful  steps  are taken towards redefining the  business  flow, 
populating  corporate data from legacy systems, integrating  with 
the  existing ERP system, efficiently modifying the SCM and  CRM, 
and  implementing stringent security measures. By  introducing  a 
wide range of WYSIWYG development tools, the IT industry makes e-
commerce  development  look much simpler. But e-commerce  is  not 
just about creating attractive web stores.

This  article  highlights  the  architecture  and  implementation 
guidelines of e-commerce. It is aimed at providing  organisations 
a strategic approach for introducing e-commerce.

Types of application

The applications spawning out of the e-commerce initiative can be 
broadly   grouped  into  seven  categories  (Courtesy:   Aberdeen 
Consulting  Group).  While not being all-inclusive,  these  seven 
areas cover most of the common business transactions:

* B-to-B procurement (e-procurement).

* B-to-B and B-to-C sales (e-sales). 

* B-to-B virtual marketplaces and enterprise portals (e-portals).

* One-to-one marketing and e-promotion (e-promotion).

* Customer service (e-CS).

* Electronic payments (e-pay).

Employee self-service (e-ESS).

In  addition  to  these, e-commerce can  be  implemented  between 
government  organisations  and  between the  government  and  the 
public.   However,  these  applications  can  also   be   broadly 
classified under B-to-B or B-to-C.

An integrated business solution

According  to  Mr.  Richard Campbell, President  of  Bright  Star 
Systems,   e-commerce   is  a  dynamic   set   of   technologies, 
applications  and  business  practices  that  link   enterprises, 
customers  and  suppliers  through  electronic  transactions.  E-
commerce  implementation should be an integrated solution of  the 
existing business practices, namely;

The customers, suppliers, vendors and service providers,

The organisation's business processes, and The technology.

The  adoption of e-business standards also means drastic  changes 
in the ways of conducting business. The important points to  note 
here are:

*  The business is on for 24 hours a day and 365 days a year  (No 
holidays).

* The organisation displays its products/services in the  virtual 
market place (Complete transparency).

*  The  orders are going to pour from almost every  part  of  the 
globe (Global marketplace).

* The customer wants a product according to his specifications by 
"yesterday" (High customer expectations).

To be precise,

An  executive  might  order a book at amazon.com on  the  way  to 
airport  at  11 p.m. and might need it to be  delivered  for  in-
flight reading.

A  customer  might  want to send a camera to  his  college  going 
grandson in a remote village in India for his tour programme that 
might start the very next day.

A doctor might order for a medicine at medicines.com through  his 
mobile phone in the middle of heart surgery to save the patient.

Business  at  the speed of light! - may be a  little  exaggerated 
but,  e-consumers  worldwide will force the organisations  to  be 
extremely  fast. In order to keep up the pace,  the  organisation 
should carefully handle complex issues such as pricing,  multiple 
tax, government policies, shipping modes, effectiveness in supply 
chain  management,  procurement, resource availability,  just  in 
time  delivery systems, efficient customer relations  management, 
competition  and much more. The following section  discusses  the 
architecture  of  e-commerce  and the  involvement  of  different 
business units in creating e-commerce applications.

Architecture of e-commerce

A  simple  web  application  can  be  designed  as  a  three-tier 
(browser,  web  server and  database)  architecture  constituting 
three  modules, namely, Presentation logic, which deals with  the 
HTML   pages  that  help  the  user  to  navigate   through   the 
organisational   information,  Data  logic,  which   deals   with 
databases  related to the application, and Business logic  -  the 
interface between presentation logic and data logic.

But,  e-commerce  applications should be based  on  a  multi-tier 
architecture   as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  Compared  to  other   web 
applications, e-commerce applications should be highly secure and 
depend  more  on third party service providers such  as  security 
service providers, merchant bankers and financial institutions.

The components of each layer will be discussed here next week  in 
conjunction  with the processes and the tools/technology  related 
to them.

E-commerce  cannot be an independent system that would take  care 
of  the business on the Internet on its own. It should be  viewed 
as  a  giant integrated information warehouse extended  from  the 
existing  resources that would cater to the information needs  of 
the  employees,  customers and  suppliers.  Organisations  should 
leverage   their   back-end  systems  at  the  point   of   every 
transaction,   providing  relevant  and  timely  information   to 
customers.  Today,  an  organisation's data is not  in  a  single 
source  - it is distributed on Oracle, MFG-PRO, Ingress, DB2  and 
so  on.  The  systems  interface  layer  should  be  designed  to 
integrate these legacy systems and make them more transparent  on 
the web. For instance, when a customer orders an item online, the 
order  should  immediately get into the order  management  system 
that might be residing in an Oracle database and the supply chain 
management (SCM) that might be residing in an Ingress database.

Middleware  solutions  such  as  CORBA,  COM/DCOM  and  RMI   are 
available  to integrate different platforms and  technologies.  A 
data  warehouse should be designed to accommodate data  from  the 
legacy systems from which e-commerce data would be populated. The 
important consideration here is to maintain the data integrity of  
the  information  that  has to go and  come  from  the  customer. 
Typically,  the data warehouse should contain the data  populated 
from the legacy systems as well as the data originating out of e-
sales,  e-procurement  and e-payment. The data  management  layer 
should  precisely  address  the  issues  of  providing  a  single 
integrated  source of reliable business information for  all  the 
stakeholders, namely, business partners, customers, suppliers and 
employees.

Security   is  the  most  critical  aspect  of   the   e-commerce 
application.  Even today, a majority of customers are  not  fully 
convinced in giving their credit card numbers over the  Internet. 
If trading on the Internet is not 100 per cent secure, the  money 
transaction  will continue to happen only in  conventional  ways. 
Conscious  of  this, the IT industry is progressively  coming  up 
with sophisticated Internet security standards. 

As  the  entire  business is integrated and thrown  open  to  the 
world, the organisation faces security threats from internal  and 
external   sources.   Though  powerful   security   technologies, 
including  encryption, authentication, firewalls,  and  intrusion 
detection systems are available, it is the responsibility of  the 
organisation  to intelligently select, combine and introduce  the 
technologies right from the launch of the project.

Money  transaction is the essential feature of e-commerce. It  is 
important  to implement secure, cost-effective and reliable  ways 
to  collect payments and process transactions over the  Internet. 
There are plenty of software products that will take care of  the 
actual transaction. 

The transaction system of e-commerce should take care of the 24 x 
7  (24  hours a day, 7 days a week) uptime  of  the  application, 
transaction  integrity, concurrent system interface,  ability  to 
handle the increase in volume of transaction, risk management and 
recovery  system.  While  building  the  transaction  layer,  the 
organisation  should  aim at achieving faster response  time  and 
transaction closure.

User  interface involves building attractive online  storefronts. 
The  e-commerce site should provide  well-organised  HTML/ASP/JSP 
pages that display the required information. The customers should 
be  able  to  navigate through the pages  and  get  the  relevant 
information within a few mouse clicks. The user interface  module 
should  also  take  care  of  personalising  customer  relations, 
sending  periodic  product catalogues,  client-side  verification 
systems,  efficient search engines, foot-print  analysis,  online 
help  and  frequently  asked  questions  and  answers.  The  core 
consideration  here  is in providing a look and feel  that  would 
make using the site a pleasure!

E-commerce  implementation should be in a phased  manner.  Before 
actually  getting  into the development stage,  the  organisation 
should  plan  the type of e-commerce application that has  to  be 
built   first.  A  sample  approach  for  a   phased   e-commerce  
introduction is provided herein:

* Start with e-employee self-service (e-ESS) and test it with the 
employees.

* After evaluating the success, and performing a SWOT analysis an 
extranet can be implemented for e-procurement with select vendors 
in select regions.

*  Next  target  could be,  implementing  e-procurement  for  all 
procurement activities from all regions.

* After a couple of B-to-B implementations, the organisation  can 
go ahead with B-to-C implementation.

Whatever may be the type, the development should start only after 
implementing  the  legacy  system interface layer  and  the  data 
management  layer.  Mr. Chuck Shih,  Research  Director,  Gartner 
Group,  feels that organisations should make a checklist  of  the 
best     business    practices,    infrastructure     and     the 
customers/partners, before and after implementing the  e-commerce 
applications.  The e-commerce development team should by  default 
include professionals drawn from various divisions, namely,  MIS, 
ERP,  procurement,  inventory, marketing, quality,  and  software 
development. The accompanying diagram tries to provide a  planned 
approach towards e-commerce implementation.

The  forces exerted by rapid changes in technology  and  customer 
expectations  are  unstoppable. So, the need  to  constantly  re-
evaluate  and  reinvent the existing business  processes  becomes 
inevitable. The key in ensuring success in any major exercise  or 
initiative will be to focus on fundamental guidelines. They are - 
do  not  rush, lay the foundation strong and plan  carefully  and 
implement.

Such  fundamentals  only can ensure organisations  from  tumbling 
into an e-business disillusionment!
