
The way to have fun and pull together Intervention at Mastek India


Companies have for sometime tried to find ways and means to  iron 
out the barriers of structure and hierarchy. To some extent  this 
has  been  possible in the West and to a lesser extent  in  South 
East  Asia.  The  success in the west can be  attributed  to  the 
sociological  structure  being less rigid than in the  east.  The 
difference  in economic status between the Managing Director  and 
the  commissionaire  exists  but  there  is  very  little  social 
difference, and even if it is there, the concept has fallen  prey 
to the mantra of political correctness.

The Far East

In  the  Far East, notably Japan, the hierarchical  structure  is 
rigid,  bordering  on veneration for the top boss.  The  Japanese 
culture is structured around the "father-figure" model where  the 
Head  of a corporation is considered as the pater familias or  as 
the benign parent to be venerated and followed without  question. 
This  works well in Japan because of the Kaizen philosophy  which 
enjoins   upon  the  leader  an  inflexible  duty  to   put   his 
subordinates before himself.

The junior most worker will be confident that his interests  will 
be  taken  care of by the top man. They are  assured  that  their 
concerns will be foremost in the minds of the Chairman. In China, 
Hong  Kong,  Taiwan and to an extent in Singapore,  the  "Taipan" 
concept  mimics  the  Japanese  model  though  there  are  cracks 
appearing  in the structures there due to the influence from  the 
West.

The Indian scenario

In  India  alone  has there been  unfortunate  fallout  from  the 
marriage  of Western business practice and the Indian ethos.  The 
distance  between the commissionaire and the Chairman is so  vast 
that the two cannot either understand the desires and aspirations 
of the other and nor do they care very much. It is in this  light 
that a leading Indian IT Corporation has taken it upon itself  to 
spread  the message to all its employees that they  are,  through 
corporate  eyes,  all equally important for the  success  of  the 
organisation.

The Runtime Concept

Runtime  - is a Mastek family affair where right from the CMD  to 
the  office attendant with their families, travel together  in  a 
2nd  class railway compartment to a fun destination and  vacation 
for a few days in a five star hotel.

The Raison d'etre

Runtime  is  about having fun as a  group.  Travelling  together.  
Staying  together.  Getting to know one another at  a  level  far 
deeper  than at a peripheral worktime relationship.  The  concept 
puts  into  practice some of the Mastek core values -  long  term 
relationship, respect for the individual and team work.

The Methodology

In  the  initial  years, it was about  getting  people  from  all 
branches  together,  people who had probably not met  each  other 
ever, but were working for the same larger family.

Secondly,  it is about integrating the corporation.  Despite  our 
Strategic Business Unit structure, Mastek is more than the sum of 
its parts - SBU's and Functions. Runtime is a platform for people 
to come together and see the larger picture. In the process, they 
transform the way they work and relate to other departments on  a 
day-to-day  basis.  Runtime  brings  the  family  together  as  a 
homogenous group.

Thirdly,  it is a forum for launching new initiatives. The  first 
Runtime  saw Mastek initiating the Quality initiative. Last  year 
was  about  JDGI (Just Go Do It) concept. The fact that  a  large 
part of the organisation gets together makes it the ideal  launch 
vehicle. Fourthly, this is an occasion for bringing the  extended 
company  together - the Mastekeers' families. An opportunity  for 
the  family  to figure out what is really done at  Mastek.  Often 
families  are unaware of what the wage earner does for  the  long 
hours  s/he  spends  at the office, Runtime  is  the  ideal  time 
families  can  observe,  at  first hand,  the  equations  at  the 
workplace and the nature of the job.

The Conclusion

Runtime  is a celebration. A celebration of corporate growth.  It 
allows all employees to enjoy the fruits of joint achievement. It 
provides  an  opportunity for all the members  of  the  corporate 
community to feel a sense of having contributed to the growth  of 
the  organisation.  That it has worked is testament to  the  fact 
that innovative working practices do make a difference, no matter 
how  alien  it is to the psyche of the society  that  adopts  the 
intervention.

Abhimanyu Acharya

abhimanyu@india.com
