
An evolving industry 


IN  THE first five articles we have discussed the role of  mutual 
funds,  their  legal structure, performance of  mutual  funds  in 
India  and  as well as taxation aspects. In this section  let  us 
make  an  attempt at crystal gazing. The  present  popularity  of 
mutual funds may be called the second coming of the industry. The 
industry needs to think hard how it should focus on the  customer 
for  rapid development of the industry. The size of the  industry 
is  today only about Rs. 100,000 crores, that is, less  than  $25 
billion.  Compared to this, the size of the industry in the  U.S. 
is nearly $4 trillion.

The mutual fund industry has started moving away from the assured 
returns  schemes  which had become popular and which  has  got  a 
number of players into serious trouble. The industry must be able 
to  convey to the public that it cannot generate returns  out  of 
nothing. The value of a mutual fund or its net asset value  (NAV) 
is a function of the value of the underlying assets, the value of 
the whole is only a sum of the value of its parts. 

One  is  again witnessing among the leading  players  competitive 
advertising  with each mutual fund extolling its virtues.  During 
the  past one year, on account of the rapid rise in  the  Sensex, 
the returns from equity and balanced schemes in general have been 
excellent. Investors must realise that if there is a fall in  the 
index,  then  the value of these schemes may again go  down.  The 
Association  of  Mutual  Funds can play a  role  in  continuously 
educating the public regarding the overall benefits of  investing 
the mutual fund way.

Who are going to be the main players in future?

The  Unit  Trust  of  India,  being  a  specialist  mutual   fund 
organisation,  should  remain  a  major  player  in  the  future. 
However,  its  share of the total business is  expected  to  come 
down.  The mutual funds promoted by the public sector  commercial 
banks should have become major players. However, for many reasons 
they are losing market share. They have not been able to leverage 
their  branch strength for cross selling purposes. The  concerned 
asset   management  companies  (AMCs)  have  not  really   become 
independent businesses. 

Similar is the case with the mutual funds sponsored by the public 
sector  insurance  companies.  The coming  years  will  determine 
whether  a  few of them will become major players in  the  mutual 
fund  business. It may be added here that a few commercial  banks 
have  announced their plans to enter the insurance business  once 
the  business  is  liberalised. A  strong  commercial  bank  with 
diversification  into mutual fund business as well  as  insurance 
business can become a financial supermarket. This is the way  the 
financial  services  market has been developing in  a  number  of 
developed countries. 

In  the  case of Indian business houses, the problems  have  been 
different. The entry barrier in terms of capital was not high and 
mutual  funds  sponsored  by some Indian  companies  entered  the 
business  in order to make quick money. However, they  discovered 
that  building  brand  names and distribution  was  not  easy  or 
inexpensive.   These  companies  have  lost  interest  and   some 
restructuring  is going on. However, one can foresee that  a  few 
good  names  will  continue to be in the  business  of  financial 
services  including  mutual funds. The real  competition  in  the 
coming  years  is expected to come from  foreign  players.  These 
players  have experience in the business in their home  countries 
and they are looking at the Indian savings business for the  long 
run. They are prepared to wait for returns while they build brand 
names  and  distribution. They will also be able to  innovate  in 
evolving new ways of distribution. For example, e-commerce is one 
way in which the new players will access the investor as they  do 
not  have the distribution strengths of UTI or  the  nationalised 
banks.

We may add here that mutual fund is a low margin business,  hence 
no  player can afford to build an expensive distribution  set-up. 
However, as the funds under management grow the returns in  terms 
of  management  fee goes up proportionately  and  the  successful 
players  then start garnering the returns. Towards this  end  the 
major  players are eyeing the large bank deposits for  increasing 
their  business. With intermediation costs low, the mutual  funds 
can offer higher returns than bank deposits. 

Banks also have to meet investment norms such as cash reserve and 
statutory  liquidity ratios as laid down by the Reserve  Bank  of 
India.  They  also have mandated priority sector  lending  norms. 
Mutual funds do not have to meet such guidelines. The only  norms 
they  have to meet are prudential investment norms  basically  to 
ensure that too much of investment does not go into a  particular 
industry  or  corporate business house. If they  can  also  offer 
liquidity  and  safety,  then  they  will  offer  really   strong 
competition to banks with their income schemes. Mutual funds  are 
also  starting  to  mimic banking  services  by  offering  cheque 
writing facility in the case of money market funds.

Another target for AMCs would be the pension funds or  retirement 
funds.  With  social security schemes not  widespread  in  India, 
growing  incomes  and  break up of joint families  will  lead  to 
substantial demand for privately run pension funds.

Once  capital  account convertibility is introduced  and  Indians 
being  allowed to invest in foreign securities, the  mutual  fund 
way would be the most appropriate investment method. The reported 
move to allow domestic mutual funds to invest in Indian issues of 
Global  Depository Receipts/American Depository Receipts  is  the 
first step in this direction.

Investors' choice

We  can  conclude by saying that mutual funds have  opened  up  a 
whole new way of investing. An investor however has to take  some 
critical   decisions.  First  what  kind  of  scheme  meets   his 
investment objectives in terms of safety, liquidity and  returns. 
As  discussed earlier, the investor also has to keep in mind  his 
risk  tolerance level. The `life cycle' theory will help  him  to 
decide  in what proportion he should parcel out his savings  into 
equity,  balanced or income oriented funds. The tax bracket  will 
decide  the  `growth' type of scheme or the  `dividend'  type  of 
scheme.

Next  the  investor  has to identify the  AMCs  which  should  be 
allowed  to manage his money. The background of the sponsor,  the 
reputation  and past performance of the AMC, the amount of  funds 
already under management, the standard of customer services,  and 
the  like are all important. If the investor has some  amount  of 
financial  expertise,  the balance sheet of the mutual  funds  as 
well as the investment details of the funds under management also 
need   to  be  studied.  The  investor  can  seek  the  help   of 
knowledgeable  friends, if needed. Depending upon the  amount  he 
wants  to  invest, the investor needs to identify three  or  four 
AMCs  with good reputation and track record. This is a  different 
kind of diversification of risks which will need to be followed.

Finally, the investor has to decide the percentage of his savings 
and the quantum of investment that he wants to put into different 
schemes.  Mutual  funds  today have become  a  better  option  as 
compared  to  a  number  of  other  small  savings   instruments. 
Liquidity  in  the  case  of open-ended  funds  is  assured.  The 
servicing  standards  of  most mutual funds  have  improved.  The 
services  offered may differ partly depending on the location  of 
the investor, in metros and large cities the servicing  standards 
are obviously better. However, the mutual funds have to earn  the 
trust  of  a  large  body of investors  in  terms  of  safety  of 
investment.

For  the average investor, depending on his total income and  tax 
liability, a good mix appears to be the following instruments:

*  Bank  deposits  for meeting transaction needs  and  a  certain 
amount of liquidity;

*  Life  insurance at a younger working age for  taking  care  of 
family in case of untimely death of earning member;

*  Investment in public provident fund or other  provident  funds 
where the return is a tax free 12 per cent or more; and

*  Investment in mutual funds to the extent of about 25 per  cent 
of the total investment capacity of the investor, with the amount 
of   investment  in  different  schemes  being  decided  by   his 
investment objectives and tax liability.

Abhijit Roy
