
Negative FDI list soon, says Maran


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 18. A negative list relating to  foreign  direct 
investment  is expected to be announced within a fortnight.  This 
would  imply that barring sectors such as defence, atomic  energy 
and  narcotics, FDI will be permitted in all other areas  through 
the  automatic route, where permission has to be sought  directly 
from  the Reserve Bank of India without seeking approval  of  the 
Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB).

This  was  disclosed by Mr. Murasoli Maran,  Union  Minister  for 
Commerce  and  Industry,  during his meeting  with  the  business 
delegation  from Singapore, led by Mr. S. Chandra Das,  Chairman, 
India Business Group Steering Committee, here today.

The  discussions  focussed  on ways and  means  of  strengthening 
bilateral relations and attracting more FDI from Singapore. There 
are  a number of joint ventures with Singapore operating  in  the 
country  at present, including 56 in Tamil Nadu. These  could  be 
much  more,  Mr.  Maran  said,  while  underlining  the  existing 
business  and  investment  opportunities  in  India.  At  present 
Singapore ranks 14th in terms of approved FDI in India.

Members  of the business delegation from Singapore  evinced  keen 
interest  in investing here in various sectors such  as  telecom, 
information   technology,  computer  software  and  real   estate 
development.  They apprised Mr. Maran about their  perception  of 
various  bottle-necks  hindering FDI inflows  in  particular  the 
problems  relating  to  repatriation  of  earnings,  availing  of 
foreign loans in projects and procedural delays.

The Minister assured the delegation about the ongoing process  of 
liberalisation  of  FDI  norms which would  give  an  impetus  to 
bilateral  trade  and investment. The delegation  from  Singapore 
included  Mr.  Buddaraju  L.  N.  Raju  from  Singapore   Network 
Services,  Ms.  Casey  Lan  Kwai-Chu  of  the  Singapore  Telecom 
International  PTE  Ltd., Mr. S. P. Khattar  from  First  Capital 
Corporation  Ltd., and Mr. Albert Hong Kin Kay of RSP  Architects 
Planners and Engineers Ltd.
