
Donald comes to India with a purpose


CENTURION  PARK,  JAN. 18. Allan Donald will tour India  for  the 
three-week  Test  series  in March. It is  clear  that  his  sole 
purpose  is to collect the 10 wickets he needs to reach  300,  an 
ambition  that  burns inside him, and that once he  has  achieved 
that aim he will head for home. 

``I received a phone call last night that conveyed the good  news 
that Donald is ready to tour India,'' said Gulam Rajan, the  team 
manager  as  the fifth Test. ``He sounded very  enthusiastic  and 
said  he  was  keen  to do his best in the  Tests.''  He  has  no 
intention of playing the one-day series and he has been left  out 
of  the  triangular  series between South  Africa,  Zimbabwe  and 
England which begins this weekend.

So if you want to see one of the fiercest bowlers in history  for 
a  last  time  buy your tickets now. It is  clear  that  Donald's 
career   is  coming  to  an  end.  ``His  future  now   is   with 
Warwickshire,'' said a high-ranking United Cricket Board of South 
Africa  official recently and, although he will return  to  South 
Africa  in  September after the English county  season,  it  will 
require  a superhuman effort for him to force his way  back  into 
the Test side.

Who  shall we compare him with? Fred Trueman, a fast bowler of  a 
different type from a completely different era, took 307  wickets 
in  67 Tests; Donald has 290 in 67. Trueman relied on  a  subtler 
set  of  variations,  based  on a classic  action,  a  round  arm 
delivery  and an unforgettable outswinger that often  started  on 
leg stump and hit middle and off.

Donald  was a simpler bowler. He charged to the wicket  and  left 
the  ball  go as quickly as his body would allow, glared  at  the 
batsman  as  if he had just received a personal  affront  to  his 
family  and then went back to his mark and repeated the  process. 
Not  for  him the slower, more delicate  improvement  of  Richard 
Hadlee,  the  most  complete fast bowler of  this  era,  nor  the 
consistency  of Kapil Dev, nor the inch-perfect precision of  the 
late Malcolm Marshall.

He played his 67 Tests in half the period that Trueman needed.  A 
different  more leisurely, less tolerant era meant that  Trueman, 
seen  as  a  bad boy in his time played only half  the  Tests  he 
should  have  done. Donald had the advantage  of  better  medical 
facilities  and  the knowledge that has  been  accumulated  since 
Trueman's  day. So we must presume, as usual, that Trueman  would 
have  been as big a legend now as he was in the 1960s and  1970s; 
that  Donald would have taken his Test wickets by the handful  50 
years ago.What is certain is that we will miss Donald as we  miss 
Trueman.  They  always say there are no characters  left  in  the 
game, but one day Nantie Hayward, Shaun Pollock, Darren Gough and 
the  rest  will be spoken of in tones of awe  just  as  Trueman's  
feats are now celebrated. 

- Ted Corbett
