
Australia recalls Ian Harvey


By G. Viswanath

SYDNEY,  JAN.  18. On a day when Australia picked  its  `Top  12' 
cricketers of the last century other cricketing matters like  the 
Carlton & United series took a backseat. 

Steve  Waugh's team had a short training session in  the  morning 
before  travelling to the venue where some of the living  legends 
had  assembled. While all this was happening Pakistan  spent  the 
day  mulling  over the defeat against Australia at  the  MCG  and 
practicing  hard  for its fourth match of the  Carlton  &  United 
Series at the SCG on Wednesday.

The first defeat in the tri-series has, in the least, not been  a 
setback  for  Pakistan. The four points it won  from  the  double 
header it played at the Gabba pointed to a positive start. 

But the failure of top and middle order batsmen who have not  run 
into form must be worrying Wasim Akram. The Australians have  not 
let  Ijaz Ahmed and Inzamam-Ul-Haq get into their attacking  mode 
which  is  what  the two batsmen will be looking  forward  to  on 
Wednesday.

Akram  and Pakistan never underplayed the Shoaib Akhtar card.  On 
his  part, the fast bowler had delivered taking nine  wickets  in 
three matches, but he struggled in his second spell. Waqar Younis 
has had a decent tournament so far and he is likely to retain his 
place  with  Akram not indicating about the possibility  of  all-
rounder Azhar Mahmood being given a first call.

Ian  Harvey,  who has played eleven one-day  internationals,  has 
been  inducted  into the Australian squad. All-  rounders  Andrew 
Symonds and Shane Lee have played their roles in the first  three 
games and with Harvey's recall, Steve Waugh hopes to knot up  the 
Pakistan batsmen in the end overs. 

The teams (from):

Australia:  Stephen Waugh (Captain), Mark Waugh, Adam  Gilchrist, 
Ricky Ponting, Michael Bevan, Andrew Symonds, Damien Martin,  Ian 
Harvey,  Glenn  McGrath, Damien Fleming, Shane  Lee,  Brett  Lee, 
Stuart MacGill.

Pakistan:  Wasim  Akram (Captain), Saeed Anwar,  Mohammad  Wasim, 
Ijaz  Ahmed,  Inzamam-Ul-Haq, Yousuf Youhana,  Moin  Khan,  Abdur 
Razzaq,  Saqlain  Mushtaq,  Waqar Younis,  Shoaib  Akhtar,  Azhar 
Mahmood, Wajahatullah Wasti, Shahid Afridi, Shoiab Malik. 

Umpires:  Messrs Darrel Harper and Stephen David;  Third  umpire: 
Mr. Simon Taufel; Match Referee: Mr. Cammie Smith.
