
Austalia's top 12 of last century


By Our Special Correspondent

SYDNEY,  JAN.18. ``Bill would have loved to bowl with  Warne.  He 
would have loved it. Really loved it.'' Arthur Robert Morris  did 
not  whisper this into Shane Keith Warne's ears. He announced  it 
to  the world on Tuesday. It was not quirk of fate  that  brought 
together  Arthur Morris of the `Don Bradman's  1948  Invincibles' 
and contemporary cricket's leg spinning maestro Shane Warne,  but 
Australian  cricket history's another significant chapter  and  a 
momentous time when Australian cricket picked its `Top Dozen'  of 
the  last  century from a basket of twenty. In  fact  Morris  and 
Warne were seated next to each other.

It  was sort of `Day of Judgment' for the  Australian  cricketers 
when only Don Bradman and a few others names winning the vote was 
certain.  Many of them have been cricket idols and  heroes  until 
now; they were named Australia's ``Top Dozen'' cricketers of  the 
20th  century  and bestowed icon-like status  at  an  investiture 
ceremony  at  the  Convention Centre,  adjacent  to  the  Darling 
Harbour Super Market.

The  Australians  had a dream 1999; their national team  won  the 
cricket and rugby World Cup and the Davis Cup, the equivalent  in 
tennis. And Mark Taylor was conferred the prestige of `Australian 
of the Year'.

It  is never easy to pick a dozen cricketers from 383  cricketers 
who have played for Australia and qualify it by putting them down 
as  they  are  the  best. The ACB  simplified  the  procedure  by 
nominating 20 cricketers and asked `The Academy of Selectors'  to 
pick  twelve players. ``It became an easy task in the end.  About 
seventyone  per  cent of the academy members voted  for  the  top 
twelve,'' said Mr. Rogers.

The  Academy  of Selectors had four foreigners in  India's  Sunil 
Gavaskar, England's Lord Colin Cowdrey, Sir Alec Bedser and  West 
Indies'  Sir  Garfield Sobers. The Australians were  Bill  Brown, 
Arthur  Morris,  Neil  Harvey, Riche Benaud,  Bob  Simpson,  Bill 
Lawry,  Ian Chappell, Greg Chappell, Graham Yallop,  Kim  Hughes, 
Allan  Border,  Mark Taylor, Stephen Waugh and  journalists  Mike 
Coward, Peter Roebuck and Phil Wilkins.

The first man they chose of course was Don Bradman as captain and 
a  middle order batsman. Then William Harold Ponsford. He  played 
29  Tests  between  1924  and 1935, made  2122  runs  with  seven 
centuries.  Morris  was  himself the member  of  the  Academy  of 
Selectors,  but he was the obvious choice as opening  partner  to 
Ponsford.  Morris played 46 Tests after the War and  scored  3533 
runs with 12 centuries.

Steve  Waugh had not put down Neil Harvey's name, but the  dapper  
batsman  who was only 20 years old in the `48  Invincibles'  made 
6149 runs in 79 Tests with 21 centuries and 24 half centuries was 
a clear choice of majority of the panelists of which he too was a 
member. As were Greg Chappell, Keith Miller, Ray Lindwall, Dennis 
Lillee.  Ian  Healy was the wicket-keeper  the  selectors  picked 
ahead of Rodney Marsh, Wally Grout and Don Tallon. Allan  Border, 
the  man  who was in the vanguard of Australian  cricket  in  the 
1980s was named the 12th man. ``It's a tough job and a subjective 
one,'' he said. 

Australia's  top  12 of the last decade:  Donald  George  Bradman 
(Captain)  ,  Arthur Robert Morris , William  Harold  Ponsford  , 
Gregory Stephen Chappell , Robert Neil Harvey , Keith Ross Miller 
, Ian Andrew Healy , Raymond Russell Lindwall, Shane Keith  Warne 
,  Dennis Keith Lillee , William Joseph O'Reilly ,  Allan  Robert 
Border.
