
A satisfying tour, says Baskaran


By Our Hockey Correspondent

CHENNAI, JAN. 18. A satisfying tour. This is how the chief coach, 
Vasudevan  Baskaran,  described the fortnight the  Indian  hockey 
team  spent  in  Barcelona. Aside from  playing  the  four-nation 
tournament  featuring Germany, Spain and Canada, the Indian  team 
played  three  Test matches against Belgium and  a  one-off  Test 
against Canada. 

Baskaran acknowledges that blending the seniors with juniors  has 
paid  off  well. The team, according to him, is  in  fine  fettle 
thanks  to brilliant inputs provided by Mukesh Kumar and  Dhanraj 
Pillay  during the tour. Stating that the attack and  mid-  field 
performed  extremely  well,  Baskaran  says  the  deep   defence, 
however,  showed traces of vulnerability. His assessment is  that 
goalkeeping  has  improved perceptibly, and the  chief  coach  is 
willing to go on record about Prasad's splendid showing. 

Quite  predictably,  Baskaran  picks  Gagan  Ajit  Singh  as  the 
outstanding material among the youngsters and heaps praise on the 
player  for  the manner in which he scored  a  hat-trick  against 
Canada  in the penultimate match of the tour. Dhanraj Pillay  too 
came in for praise for his impeccable role as an attacker in  the 
final  match against Belgium that India won 4-0. ``He had a  hand 
in all the four goals,'' Baskaran says. 

Forecasting the chances in the coming tournaments, especially  in 
the  toughest - the Azlan Shah - tournament next month,  Baskaran 
expects  the return of Baljit Singh Saini, Baljit Singh  Dhillon, 
Deepak  Thakur and Jagan Sendhil in attack and Lazarus  Barla  in 
deep defence, to enhance the team's strength. 

Spain,  Baskaran  says,  has prepared exceedingly  well  for  the 
Olympic qualifier at Osaka even though the team is to be  without 
its  ace prompter, Juan Escurre, who was injured in  the  opening 
match  against Germany. He may be out of action for five  months. 
As for Germany, Baskaran feels that it is difficult to assess the 
team since most of the players have come out of the indoor season 
only a few days after the New year. 

In Baskaran's estimate, a squad comprising Jude Menezes,  Prasad, 
Dilip  Tirkey, Lazarus Barla, Dinesh Nayak, Sukhbir  Singh  Gill, 
Mohammad  Riaz,  Thriumalvalavan, Ramandeep  Singh,  Anwar  Khan, 
Mukesh Kumar, Baljit Singh Saini, Dhanraj Pillay, Deepak  Thakur, 
Baljit  Singh  Dhillon,  Gagan Ajit Singh, Samir  Dad  and  Jagan 
Sendhil  will be an ideal combination for the  tough  assignments 
ahead.

The   IHF's  line  of  thinking  is  almost   similar,   although 
indications  are that a recall of Ashish Ballal is likely  to  be 
discussed.  There is also a section of thought which favours  the  
use of the services of former chief coach, Cedric D'Souza, as the 
consultant.  A clear picture of IHF's line of action is  expected 
in a few days. 

The  team for the Azlan Shah Cup, which will feature six teams  - 
Pakistan (holder), South Korea, Germany, Canada, Malaysia and New 
Zealand  - besides India, is likely to be finalised in the  first 
week of February.
