
Drama begins before curtain rises


By Our Special Correspondent

RAJKOT,  JAN.  18. The eleventh hour arrival of Ajay  Jadeja  has 
further sharpened the edge of this season's Deodhar Trophy  which 
gets underway here tomorrow with North Zone playing West Zone  at 
the Municipal Stadium.

The domestic inter-zone one-day competition is usually a poor and 
forgotten cousin of the high-pitched international game, but with 
the  National team playing poor and, indeed, forgettable  cricket 
down  under, this time things are a little different.  Jadeja  is 
one  of a formidable cast of characters who have been  forced  to 
turn to domestic cricket to give their chances of an India recall 
a firm push.

West Zone captain Nayan Mongia and former India skipper  Mohammad 
Azharuddin  (who  will  lead  South  Zone  versus  West  here  on 
Saturday),  are  the other leading protagonists  in  the  Deodhar 
Trophy  drama which promises to throw up fresh dilemmas  for  the 
National selectors over the next few weeks.

Curiously, Jadeja's name was not on the North Zone team list sent 
out  to the host association here last week. As late  as  Sunday, 
Saurashtra  Cricket Association officials were  making  enquiries 
with Delhi to find out whether the popular big- hitter would play 
in the Deodhar Trophy. North Zone team manager Suresh Luthra said 
they had no clue about Jadeja's participation in the match  until 
they reached Rajkot last evening.

The teams:

North  Zone:  Vikram Rathour (captain), Ashu Dani,  Ajay  Jadeja, 
Pankaj  Dharmani, Dinesh Mongia, Mithun Minhas, Virender  Sehwag, 
Vijay  Dahiya,  Amit Bhandari, Rahul Sanghvi, Robin  Singh  (Jr), 
Sarandeep Singh, Rajiv Nayyar, Jasvir Singh and Surendra Singh.

West Zone: Nayan Mongia (captain), Ajit Bhoite, Zahir Khan, Wasim 
Jaffer,  Amol  Muzumdar,  Jatin  Paranjpe,  Vinod  Kambli,  Paras 
Mhambrey, Nilesh Kulkarni, Abhijit Kale, Iqbal Siddiqui, Sitanshu 
Kotak, Hitesh Parsanna and Nilesh Modi.

Umpires:  M.S.S. Ranawat (Raj) & S.B. Nandy (UP). Match  referee: 
Mohanlal Gupta (Hyd).
