
Prabhanjan puts Mysore in final


By Our Sports Reporter

MYSORE,  JAN.  18.  K. Prabhanjan did the star  turn  for  Mysore 
University as his team pulled off a 3-2 verdict against  Calcutta 
to  book a place in the final of the  All-India  inter-university 
tennis  tournament  here  on  Tuesday.  Mysore  will  clash  with 
reigning  champion  Madras University, Chennai in  the  final  on 
Wednesday. 

It was indeed an inspired performance from Prabhanjan. The  fifth 
semester  B.E.  student, spurred on by a partisan  crowd  had  to 
bring off his best in the decider against Calcutta's top  singles 
player Rohan Bhasin. And he did just that for a 6-1, 6-3 win.

In   the  morning  too,  with  Mysore  captain  Ramachandra   Urs 
struggling  to find his rhythm, it was Prabhanjan who  did  short 
work  of Abhishek Jagnani at 6-3, 6-3 with some delectable  play. 
Urs  on  his  part did pull it off  against  Rohan  Bhasin  after 
dropping  the first set at 5-7. But midway through to  the  final 
set Rohan was a spent force and suffered from cramps and fatigue.

It was however the doubles play of Ramachandra Urs and Prabhanjan 
that  was  deplorable.  The two just could  not  get  their  acts 
together and messed up what looked an easy match to lose 5- 7, 3-
6 to the Calcutta combination of Abhishek and Rohan Bahri.

After  a  short break, it was expected of the Mysore  captain  to 
turn  the  tide. But to the disappointment of  the  local  crowd, 
Ramachandra failed to step on the gas and lost tamely at 1-6, 4-6 
to help Calcutta tie the match scores at 2-2. 

But  Prabhanjan  at  the  adjoining  court  gave  nothing   away. 
Repeatedly  passing  Rohan  at  either  flanks  Prabhanjan  raced 
through the decider in an emphatic manner.

In the other semifinal, Osmania was a beaten lot even before  the 
start  with the big serving Anjan Viplav nursing a sore  shoulder 
and  Vinay  Karia  opting to sit out with  stomach  trouble.  And 
although Madras University captain erred in fielding Rahul Gandhi 
instead  of  R. Narendran in the singles, it had  no  significant 
difference  in  the final score line as the Chennai  side  romped 
home 4-1. 

The results (semifinals): 

Madras  bt  Osmania 4-1 (Avinash Arun bt Anjan  Viplav  6-3,  3-0 
(concd.);  Rahul  Gandhi  lost to Kaleem  Ahmed  6-4,  2-6,  2-6; 
Avinash Arun & R. Narendran bt Anjan Viplav & Vinay Karia 6-4, 7-
6 (7-3); Rahul Gandhi bt Anjan Viplav 6-2, 4-2 (concd.);  Avinash 
Arun bt Kaleem Ahmed 6-3, 5-0 (concd.).

Mysore bt Calcutta 3-2 (Ramachandra Urs bt Rohan Bhasin 5-7, 6-2, 
6-2; K. Prabhanjan bt Abhishek Jagnani 6-3, 6-3; Ramachandra  Urs 
& K. Prabhanjan lost to Abhishek Jagnani & Rohan Bahri 5-7,  3-6; 
Ramachandra Urs lost to Abhishek Jagnani 1-6, 4-6; K.  Prabhanjan 
bt Rohan Bhasin 6-1, 6-3).
