
England wins a close Test


By Ted Corbett 

CENTURION  PARK, JAN.18. A day that began as a piece  of  cricket 
ritual  after  three days lost to rain turned  into  a  rivetting 
moment  in the game's history after each side in the  fifth  Test 
sacrificed  an innings in an attempt to give the match  bite  and 
meaning. England won, after a daring innings by Alec Stewart  and 
Michael  Vaughan's first Test 50 in a fifth wicket stand of  126, 
by  two wickets with five balls in hand. If that sounds like  the 
result  of a one-day international then it reflects this  bizarre 
final day of the series. It ended a South African run of 14 Tests 
without defeat.

South Africa is to be praised for making the gesture and  England 
for   accepting  it.  The  final  result  was  devalued  by   the 
circumstances  but  no  matter. It is  up  to  the  International 
Cricket  Council to ensure that in future these rain-hit  matches 
are better monitored. 

An hour before the start Hansie Cronje approached Nasser  Hussain 
with  the  suggestion that 255 off 73 overs might be  a  suitable 
target. Hussain hesitated but negotiations continued as the South 
Africans went to 248 for eight, leaving England to score 249  off 
76  overs to gain a victory. It was a generous offer from  a  man 
who has often been painted as unimaginative and dull.

It  is unprecedented in 1482 Tests spread over 122 years for  two 
sides  to sacrifice two innings in order to find a  result.  This 
move  had  an immediate effect among bookmakers, who  are  not  a 
trusting  body of men. Ladbrokes in England and, if  reports  are 
correct, bookmakers in India refused bets on the match. 

They  clearly thought something was amiss. Protests came in  from 
those  who  had put money on a draw as well as purists  who  felt 
that  the  Law  14.2 had been broken -  technically  at  least  - 
because no attempt was made to start the England first innings.

Of  course it is ridiculous to suggest that any player of  either 
side would contribute to a deception but we may yet be faced with 
another  inquiry  simply  because those who  made  the  decisions 
naively  thought  only that they were trying to give the  game  a 
boost after three days of rain had killed this Test. Whether they 
betrayed the dignity of Test cricket is another matter. 

You  can take the opinion offered by Ian Botham, a firm  believer 
in cricket's sporting principles. ``In the circumstances I  think 
it is for the good,'' he said. ``Cricket is losing spectators and 
those thousands here must have been pleased at the prospect of  a 
game with real interest rather than a stalemate.''

Or you can take the opposite view: that cricket is a better  game  
if it is played without quarter and that no-one should mess  with 
it.  The  Australian  pair Shane Warne and  Mark  Waugh  and  the 
Pakistan judicial inquiry have done enough damage without  giving 
other  tongues  the chance to wag. There is an old  Greek  saying 
that  a  man would be better to lose his eye than  his  name  and 
today cricket came close to losing a name that has been respected 
for more than 200 years. In one sense Cronje got it right. We saw 
a fascinating day's cricket. Lance Klusener, hitting whenever  he 
got  the  chance  so  that his 61 came in  93  balls,  and  three 
partners,  scored another 93 runs before the declaration  and  at 
lunch England were 16 without loss.

In the next two hours we saw many reasons why South Africa is  an 
outstanding  side. Its bowlers were disciplined, even  though  it 
lost  Paul  Adams  with a broken wrist after he  crashed  into  a 
boundary   board,  its  fielders  sharp  and   their   commitment 
unrelenting. England lost Mike Atherton, caught behind at 28 and, 
after his best innings of the tour, Mark Butcher for 36 out of 67 
in  26  overs.  At that point they seemed  on  course  for  their 
target,  but Hussain never got into his stride and was  out  just 
before tea caught by the diving Herschelle Gibbs at point.  Shaun 
Pollock  bowled beautifully on off stump and just short;  Ambrose 
would have been proud of him.

At 102 Chris Adams launched himself at a wide ball and turned  on 
his heel and walked immediately as Boucher flew across the  slips 
to  take the catch. Adams had the air of a batsman marching  away 
from a level he found too demanding.
