
Siwach's `golden goal' does the trick for Railways


By Kamesh Srinivasan

JABALPUR,  JAN. 18. A silken touch by Pritam Siwach  fetched  the 
`golden  goal' for Railways in its hard-earned 1-0  triumph  over 
Mumbai  in  the semifinals of the 50th  National  women's  hockey 
championship  at the Pandit Ravi Shankar Shukla Stadium  here  on 
Tuesday.

On a warm day when the thousands of keen hockey enthusiasts  were 
left  to  enjoy  their  day  under the  sun  with  fist  full  of 
groundnuts, rather than the proceedings in front of them, Haryana 
struggled  past Punjab with an identical 1-0 margin.  Meenakshi's 
penalty stroke conversion early in the second half paved the  way 
for Haryana's second successive entry into the final.

The  goal  was  not  that easy to find  for  the  Railways  which 
struggled  against Mumbai, despite dominating the proceedings  as 
its 13 penalty corners testified.

It was indeed an emotional crisis for the Railway skipper  Pritam 
Siwach,  as the centre-forward broke into tears after  connecting 
the fierce drive from the left by Suraj Lata Devi into the  cage, 
in the 10th minute of extra-time.

Playing on grass, the teams are never sure of which way the  ball 
would roll, and the stubborn approach of Mumbai won it many  fans 
this day, though the ball did not roll in its favour  eventually. 
The  team  started off in right earnest,  forcing  three  penalty 
corners in the first three minutes, though it had to be  admitted 
that Mumbai missed a fine chance when Sanghai Ibemhal Chanu  made 
a  feeble  attempt  off a pass from Poonam  Surin  in  the  first 
minute.

The leading scorer in the tournament, Mamta Kharab with 11  goals 
to her credit, did threaten a few times, but in the absence of B. 
M.  Geeta  who was out with an injury midway  through  the  first 
half,  the  frontline  struggled to play  to  its  potential  for 
Mumbai.

Skipper  Lakshmi  Shree  at the halfline made a  couple  of  fine 
crosses  from  the  right,  but Mamta Kharab  was  not  sharp  in 
availing  of  those chances, and when she did march  towards  the 
goal  in  the  first half of extratime,  the  Railway  goalkeeper 
Tingoleima Chanu stormed out confidently to defuse tension.

With  the team not able to stop the ball `dead' most of the  time 
during  the penalty corner drills, it was difficult for  Railways 
to  take  the lead, despite trying Sita  Gussain  and  Maristella 
Tirkey apart from the dependable Sandeep Kaur as the strikers  in 
the set-piece situation.

The halfline of Sumrai Tete, Sita Gussain and Sunita Dalal worked 
briskly,  but  the  forwards were unable to build  on  the  base. 
Pritam  and  Manjinder Kaur did not combine as well as  they  are 
used  to,  and Kamala Dalal was not her usual  self.  Kamala  was 
briefly rested and the right winger Jyoti Sunita Kullu was put in 
her  place as inside-left, leaving the job on the right flank  to 
Kiran Bala. But Railways could not find the winning  combination, 
till  Suraj Lata made that decisive shot from inside the  circle, 
which  Pritam deflected home to ensure the 17th successive  entry 
into the final for her team.

In comparison, the clash between Haryana and Punjab was not  that 
draining on the teams. Haryana struggled to assert itself  mainly 
because of the defensive tactics of Punjab.

However,  once  it scored the goal, as  Meenakshi  converted  the 
penalty  stroke  with  a shaky push to the  left  of  the  Punjab 
goalkeeper Amandeep Kaur, who allowed to elude her grasp, Haryana 
played a lot more confidently.

The  goalkeeper had squatted on the ball following an attempt  by 
Surinder  Kaur  to convert Haryana's fourth penalty  corner,  and 
umpire Asrita Lakra had no hesitation in awarding the penalty.

Railways will, of course, fall back on its experience in tackling 
Haryana on Wednesday. It has a record to set right, to avenge the 
defeat  in  the final of the Federation Cup a few months  ago  at 
Tirupati.
