
Knowledge that liberates


CHENNAI,  JAN.  19.  The knowledge of the  Self  (Atman)  is  the 
highest wisdom knowing which a person comes to terms with himself 
and  with the whole world. The happiness that man seeks from  the 
world  of objects is as ephemeral as the objects themselves,  but 
the  bliss  of the Self is always there and it  cannot  be  taken 
away.

So happiness must be sought within and the whole attempt to share 
this knowledge with others by those who have experienced it is to 
enable  others  also to realise it. With  spectacular  growth  in 
communication, the world has become a global village today.  Just 
as  all the best of empirical knowledge and technology are  being 
shared by one and all, the supreme knowledge of the Self must  be 
also  shared  with everyone as the time has come when it  can  no 
longer remain the prerogative of a few. 

But this must not be made a religious compulsion and there is  no 
need  to proselytise. One has to make an effort to seek  it.  The 
path  is very simple and paradoxically its very simplicity  makes 
one  miss it. Just as a person picks up all the skills  necessary 
to live in the world, Self- knowledge is essential to  understand 
oneself and lead a fulfilled life.

The Bhagavad Gita says, ``This knowledge is a sovereign  science, 
a  sovereign  secret, supremely holy,  most  excellent,  directly 
enjoyable,  attended  with  virtue, very  easy  to  practise  and 
imperishable.''  Knowledge  of all  empirical  subjects  requires 
assimilating a lot of information and ideas. But, to discover and 
know  oneself  there  is no need for ideas.  Then  how  can  this 
knowledge  be  communicated? We are used to languages,  but  like 
love  it  is  in  silence that the Self  can  be  discovered  and 
communicated. Language becomes redundant in this exercise.

In his lecture Swami Suddhananda said, because the mind was  used 
to  thoughts this knowledge sought expression in  words.  Silence 
becomes  more eloquent than words while communicating  this  joy. 
Discovery  of  the Self endows that happiness where there  is  no 
escapism.  Such a realised man is one without a motive and  hence 
all his actions are done for their own sake. In this state  there 
is neither the feeling of loss nor elation. The ``here'' and  the 
``now''  become important and not the past and the future. So  it 
is a realised man who is best equipped to live his life fully.

Where  there  is no pretension there is no gap  in  relationship. 
Does  one pretend to oneself? One has to be honest with  oneself, 
with  one's intellect and emotions. Otherwise it will  amount  to 
deceiving oneself. So also, in relationships there is unhappiness 
only when there are pretensions. Life will be happy if there  are 
no pretensions and hypocrisy.
