
Thakre may not get another term 


By Neena Vyas

NEW DELHI, JAN 21. A new president of the Bharatiya Janata  Party 
is  to  be  installed by the third week of May, and  now  it  has 
become  absolutely  clear that Mr. Kushabhau Thakre will  not  be 
getting  a second term, although even under the recently  amended 
party constitution he is in a position to stand for the election.

All  the state units have been informed that they  must  complete 
the  task of enrolling primary and active members and  finalising 
the  electoral rolls by the end of February. Between March 1  and 
May 7 state-level elections are to be completed and by the  third 
week of May the BJP will elect a new party president.

Two months ago in November Mr. Thakre himself had at first stated 
that  he was not interested in a second term as party  president, 
but  a few weeks later he told some correspondents that he  would 
be ready to accept and shoulder any responsibility that the party 
were to give him. That was taken as a gentle hint that in fact he 
may not be averse to the idea of a second term.

However,  his recent illness and frequent visits to the  hospital 
have  virtually  ruled him out for a second term. As  one  senior 
party leader said ``giving Thakreji a second term would amount to 
torturing him.''

Yet  another reason for the near certainty that Mr.  Thakre  will 
not  be  party  president after this May is  the  fact  that  the 
amended  party constitution does not allow a  second  consecutive 
term.  Although this would not come in his way - for his  current 
tenure is under the old party constitution which allowed a second 
consecutive  term  - it is felt that it would be unwise  for  the 
party to give a second term to the national president immediately 
after the amendment disallowing it.

There  is  one view that with the Prime Minister  coming  from  a 
State in the North - he represents Uttar Pradesh and was  brought 
up  in  Madhya Pradesh - it would be preferable to have  a  party 
president from the South. There is also the view that the growing 
generation  gap  between  the young  electorate  and  the  ageing 
leadership  of  the  party  should  be  bridged  by  electing   a 
``younger''   party  president.  The  process  of  discussing   a 
presidential candidate within the party will begin only after the 
state  level  elections get going, but the names that  are  being 
mentioned  include  those  of  Mr.  Jana  Krishnamurthi,  Mr.K.N. 
Govindacharya and Mr.M. Venkaiah Naidu. 
