
Normalise ties with Pak., U.S. Senators tell India


WASHINGTON,  JAN.21. The U.S. Senate Democratic leader,  Mr.  Tom 
Daschle, the Assistant Democratic leader, Mr. Harry Reid and  the 
ranking  member  on  the Non-Proliferation  Subcommittee  of  the 
Government  Affairs  Committee,  Mr.  Daniel  Akaka,  have  in  a 
statement  said  that  India  would be  a  major  player  at  the 
international level in the 21st century.

Over  the  course of three days, the Senate  delegation  met  the 
External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, the Home  Minister, 
Mr.  L.  K. Advani, the National Security  Adviser,  Mr.  Brajesh 
Mishra,  the  Opposition leader, Mrs. Sonia Gandhi,  and  visited 
Maigujar  village, site of a programme to improve the  education, 
health and economic standards of rural Indians. In addition,  the 
delegation met leaders of the information technology community to 
discuss economic development and trade opportunities between  the 
two countries.

The  Senators  recognised  and articulated  that  India  has  the 
economic  and  human resources to become a major  player  on  the 
international  scene  in the 21st century. However,  through  the 
course of their meetings, they conveyed that if India is to reach 
its  potential, it must recognise that this role carries with  it 
significant  rights and responsibilities. These  responsibilities 
include normalising their relationship with Pakistan, engaging in 
a sincere effort to resolve the Kashmir crisis and joining  other 
responsible  parties in the effort to stem the spread of  nuclear 
weapons.

``The  post  Cold War provides the United States  and  India  the 
opportunity to significantly strengthen their relationship.  Each 
side  needs  to  take certain actions if we are  to  achieve  the 
potential, made possible by the new international environment. 

The  United States must continue to become increasingly  involved 
in resolving the dispute over Kashmir. 

India needs to sign the CTBT immediately and increase its efforts 
to improve regional stability,''the Senators said.

During  their one-day stop in Nepal, the Senators met  the  Prime 
Minister,  Mr. Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, the Minister of  Foreign 
Affairs,  Mr. Ram Sharan Mahat and a representative of the  Dalai 
Lama,  Samdup  Lhatse,  during their tour of  a  Tibetan  refugee 
centre.
