
Pak. backing N-E insurgents: P.M. 


SHILLONG,  JAN.21. The Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari  Vajpayee, 
today charged Pakistan with backing insurgents and separatists in 
the  North-Eastern States as ``part of its larger  gameplan''  to 
destabilise  India  and  said  this  had  impeded  the  regions's 
economic development.

``It  is  now well established that Pakistan is backing  some  of 
these  groups  as  part  of  its  larger  gameplan  to  try   and 
destabilise  India,''  Mr. Vajpayee said. He was  inaugurating  a 
two-day  Conference  of Governors and Chief  Ministers  of  seven 
North Eastern States here. The conference was also attended among 
others by the Union Home Minister, Mr. L. K. Advani, the  Defence 
Minister, Mr. George Fernandes and the Planning Commission Deputy 
Chairman, Mr. K. C. Pant.

``One  of many factors that have impeded economic development  in 
some North-Eastern States is violence unleashed by insurgents and 
externally-aided   separatists  and  criminals,''  he  told   the 
conference.

Mr.  Vajpayee  said  the Centre had  been  assisting  insurgency-
affected  States  with  paramilitary forces  and  by  reimbursing 
security-related expenditure.

``But this cannot compensate for the terrible price extracted  by 
insurgents  and  extortionists  at the expense  of  the  region's 
development  or  the  fear psychosis created by  them  among  the 
people,'' the Prime Minister said.

Stating  that  there  was a growing  perception  that  widespread 
unemployment  and  lack of job prospects were  the  main  factors 
behind insurgency and criminal activities that have retarded  the 
economic progress of this region, he said ``together, we need  to 
pursue   development  policies  and  programmes   that   generate 
employment  opportunities, though not necessarily  in  Government 
sectors.''

Mr. Vajpayee also stressed the need for effective governance  for 
economic  development.  ``In  order to be  effective,  the  State 
Governments   represented   here  have   to   ensure   time-bound 
implementation of projects and transparency in their functioning. 
This  is  necessary for people to repose trust in  their  elected 
representatives,'' he added.

He,  however,  admitted that many States of the region  became  a 
part of the planning process much later. ``Bearing this in  mind, 
the outlay for the States under the Ninth Plan had been increased 
to  Rs. 25,283.52 crores which is nearly Rs. 10,000  crores  more 
than the previous plan outlay.''

The Prime Minister expressed displeasure over the performance  of  
North  Eastern  Council(NEC) saying it had not lived  up  to  the 
expectations.  He  said the Government was determined  to  ensure 
that  the council was not only revitalised but also met  twice  a 
year  which  would  expedite the  developmental  process  in  the 
region.

The Assam Chief Minister, Mr. Prafulla Kumar Mahanta, today urged 
Mr. Vajpayee to provide a minimum term loan of Rs. 1000 crores to 
the State to help overcome its precarious financial condition.

Addressing  the  conference, Mr. Mahanta, highlighted  the  acute 
financial imbalances arising out of Assam's narrow resource  base 
and  heavy expenditure to contain terrorism and  insurgency  over 
the  past few years and demanded that the Centre grant the  State 
debt-relief.

Sikkim's  Chief Minister, Mr. Pawan Kumar Chamling,  today  asked 
the  Centre to complete the process for restructuring  the  North 
Eastern Council (NEC) urgently for an expeditious  infrastructure 
development of the State. - PTI, UNI
