
Singapore ideal 'launching pad' 


By Our Special Correspondent

BANGALORE,  JAN. 21. The Singapore Prime Minister, Mr.  Goh  Chok 
Tong,  today  urged more Indian companies to use Singapore  as  a 
platform to expand their business in East Asia. ``One interesting 
area is e-business,'' Mr. Goh said. 

Inaugurating  the  International  Tech Park  at  Whitefield  near 
Bangalore,  Mr.  Goh said e-business was  experiencing  explosive 
growth  in  Asia  as evidenced by a  large  number  of  `dot.com' 
companies.  The  Indian  IT companies  would  find  Singapore  an 
excellent launching pad into the Asian e-business market.

Referring to the transformation of the Tech Park since he visited 
the site in 1994, Mr. Goh said with the coming of the IT era  the 
strategic alliance between India and Singapore would bring  great 
synergy. 

The  Tech Park was ``an icon in Bangalore and it may be more  apt 
to call it the Silicon Plateau of India and one of the top 10  IT 
destinations of the world'', the Singapore Prime Minister said. 

The  Chief Minister, Mr. S.M. Krishna, said the State  Government 
would  like to create an IT corridor of Bangalore, starting  from 
Whitefield   and   following  a  well-delineated  path   to   the 
Electronics  City  on  the South-East of the  City.  Fibre  optic 
communication lines would be laid shortly throughout the corridor 
along  with  a  modern transport system,  including  an  elevated 
railway, theme parks and uninterrupted power supply.

The  State Government would start work within a fortnight on  the 
Cyber  Parks  in  Mangalore and Mysore and link them  up  with  a 
similar  facility  in Hubli, which would result  in  a  ``Silicon 
Quadrangle'',  Mr.  Krishna  said. On  e-governance,  he  said  a 
subsidiary  of the Singapore Computer Board had been  engaged  to 
design  an integrated Management Information System  which  would 
directly  link  all  districts with the  State  headquarters.  To 
promote decentralisation, Kannada-based computer systems were  to 
be provided to the gram panchayats through a Wide Area Network. 

The Chairman of Information Technology Park Ltd., Mr. Ratan Tata, 
said 21 new companies signed documents today to take up space  in 
the park.
