
Stalemate over seats continues in NDA 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 21. A final effort to clinch a deal between  the 
quarrelling National Democratic Alliance would-be partners in the 
Bihar Assembly elections is expected to be made by the Union Home 
Minister, Mr L. K. Advani, tomorrow.

A  meeting at Mr. Advani's residence on Thursday night could  not 
help  resolve the differences on seat-sharing between the  Samata 
Party and the Janata Dal(United) although senior leaders of  both 
the  parties  - Mr. George Fernandes, Mr. Nitish Kumar,  Mr.  Ram 
Vilas  Paswan  and Mr. Sharad Yadav - were present at  the  first 
meeting  which  included  representatives of three  of  the  four 
parties hoping to contest the elections under one umbrella.

The party has cleared the names of 25 candidates for the Assembly 
elections in Manipur and has also finalised the candidate for the 
Majuli  (reserved)  Lok  Sabha  seat  in  Assam  from  where  Mr. 
Durgeshwar  Dolai  is to contest. Mr. Ashok Yadav  would  be  the 
party  candidate  for the Kannauj Lok Sabha byelection  in  Uttar 
Pradesh from where Mr. Mulayam Singh Yadav's son is the Samajwadi 
Party candidate.

In fact, the BJP has not been able to finalise seat- sharing even 
in Orissa and Haryana, where it has to deal with only one ally in 
each  of  the two States. Mr. K. N.  Govindacharya,  BJP  general 
secretary, has apparently conveyed to the Indian National Lok Dal 
president,  Mr.  Om Prakash Chautala, that he agree  to  the  BJP 
contesting  35  of  the 90 Assembly seats in Haryana  as  he  had 
himself offered this earlier during the talks. The State BJP unit 
is  not  willing  to lower its demand further,  and  the  central 
leadership has endorsed the State unit's view as evident from Mr. 
Govindacharya's communication to Mr. Chautala. Party leaders feel 
that Mr. Chautala may now appeal directly to the Prime Minister.

Senior  leaders  here say that in Orissa the BJP was  willing  to 
share  the  Assembly seats along roughly the same  ratio  as  was 
adopted  for  the 1999 Lok Sabha polls when the Biju  Janata  Dal 
contested  12  seats  and the BJP nine. Since the  BJD  lost  two 
seats, the BJP would now like the seat-sharing on an 11:10 ratio. 
The  party  is  discounting the noises  emanating  from  the  BJD 
pointing out that Mr. Naveen Patnaik, Biju Janata Dal chief,  has 
not spoken his mind.

The  Samata leader, Mr. Nitish Kumar, said today that  his  party 
had  suggested 156 seats for the BJP, 108 for the Samata, 42  for 
the  JD(U)  and 18 for the Bihar People's Party, ``but  that  was 
rejected by the JD(U).'' Mr. Kumar also said: ``After the  manner 
in  which  the  JD(U)  betrayed  us  (he  was  referring  to  the 
affidavits  to  the  Election Commission) we were  left  with  no 
option but to seek a separate group status in the Lok Sabha.'' He  
claimed that the Samata had ``scaled down its demands'' from  the 
earlier 130 seats, and ``others should also do the same.''

However,  some senior BJP leaders privately dispute the  Samata's 
claim  to  108  seats, and said that no matter  what  formula  is 
applied the Samata claim cannot go beyond 96 seats.
