
Help apprehend Osama, U.S. tells Pakistan


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD,  JAN. 21. The U.S. Assistant Secretary of  State,  Mr. 
Karl  Inderfurth,  said here on Friday that the  purpose  of  his 
trips  was  to discuss key issued of concern to both  the  United 
States   and  Pakistan,  including  terrorism,   democratisation, 
economic  reform,  halting  the spread  of  nuclear  weapons  and 
ballistic  missiles  as  well as  promoting  regional  stability, 
especially through productive dialogue with India. He was reading 
from a prepared statement before addressing a press conference.

``Our meetings (here) have been candid and useful as they  should 
be between friends. These meetings come at a critical time.  They 
closely  follow  the  visits of several  U.S.  Senators...''  Mr. 
Indefurth said.

The  key  issues he identified are: the need for  cooperation  to 
reduce  the threat of terrorism which stems from the  region  and 
directly  threatens the U.S., the region and the world  which  is 
dramatically illustrated by the recent hijacking, the need for  a 
comprehensive road map with milestones for a return to democratic 
civilian rule, the need for regional stability and prevention  of 
an  arms race in South Asia and the restoration of  a  productive 
dialogue with India.

``All  these  measures, I want to add, we believe  would  enhance 
Pakistan's security. Finally, we stressed the urgency with  which 
the  (U.S.)  President (Mr. Bill Clinton) and the  Congress  view 
these  issues.  We  trust our messages  have  been  received  and 
understood,  and that we have increased our mutual  understanding 
on them,'' Mr. Inderfurth added.

On  Osama bin Laden and talks with the Taliban and Pakistan,  the 
U.S. official said: ``The message was that Pakistan's support  of 
the Taliban - the Taliban who harbour and protect Osama bin Laden 
-  is a concern to us. The continuing presence of bin  Laden  and 
his  network  in  Afghanistan  we believe  is  a  threat  to  the 
international  community. We urge the Government of  Pakistan  to 
use its influence with the Taliban to have bin Laden expelled  to 
a place where he can be brought to justice as called for in  (UN) 
Security Council Resolution 1267.''

``With  respect  to  bin Laden, this is an issue  which  we  have 
discussed many times with the Government of Pakistan and.....with 
the  Taliban....I cannot say that we have received assurances  in 
this  regard,  but we do believe it is important to  restate  the 
urgency....that bin Laden be expelled and brought to justice.  We 
hope  that  that  day  will happen  very  soon,''  Mr.  Indefurth 
maintained.

On  the  regional situation, Mr. Inderfurth said  that  the  U.S.  
expressed  deep concern about the current tensions in the  region 
and ``we fully appreciate'' the role the hijacking played as well 
as the long-standing dispute over Kashmir.

``We continue to urge both Pakistan and India to exercise maximum 
restraint and to enter into negotiations towards a solution  that 
is  acceptable  to both parties and with respect to  Kashmir  one 
what  will  meet the needs of the Kashmiri people. Last  July  4, 
President  Clinton  expressed his willingness to play  an  active 
role  in  support  of  establishing  such  negotiations....as   a 
practical  matter, the U.S. can only be helpful when  the  proper 
conditions  exist  and both parties agree that we  should  lay  a 
role,'' he maintained.

Mr. Inderfurth was accmpanied by Mr. Micahel Sheehan, coordinator 
for  counter-terrorism  at the State Department, and  Mr.  Donald 
Camp,  Directort  for South Asia at the  U.S.  National  Security 
Council. 
