
U.S. Senators want Pak. to address terrorism threat


WASHINGTON,  JAN.21. The U.S. Senate Democratic leader,  Mr.  Tom 
Daschle,  the  Assistant  Democratic leader, Mr.  Harry  Reid,  a 
senior member of the Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Christopher 
Dodd and the ranking member on the Non-Proliferation Subcommittee 
of  the  Government  Affairs Committee, Mr.  Daniel  Akaka,  have 
released  a statement at the conclusion of their recent visit  to 
Southwest Asia. The delegation conducted a series of  discussions 
with  senior  Government  officials and  other  important  policy 
makers in India, Pakistan and Nepal.

``As  the  21st  century unfolds, Southwest Asia  will  assume  a 
larger  role on the international stage and in our  own  national 
economic  and security considerations. This region  presents  the 
United   States   with  significant  challenges   and   important 
opportunities.  During the course of our visit,  we  communicated 
our concerns to key leaders in each country. In our meetings with 
these leaders, we set forth the framework that the United  States 
believes  would  allow relations in each of  these  countries  to 
reach   their  full  potential,''the  Senators  said   in   their 
statement.

``Upon  our  return  we  will  report  on  these  discussions  to 
President  Clinton, administration officials and our  colleagues. 
It is also our intention to closely follow developments in  these 
countries  and  to  address certain  foreign  policy  initiatives 
concerning them as we deem appropriate,''the statement added.

On Pakistan visit

The  Senators  conducted lengthy discussions with  key  Pakistani 
leaders,  including the Chief Executive, Gen.  Pervez  Musharraf, 
the Foreign Minister, Mr. Abdus Sattar, representatives from  the 
Pakistan Muslim League and several Opposition parties.

The Senators stressed five key principles that must be  addressed 
by  the current Pakistani leadership and that are of  significant 
concern to the United States, including the urgent need to:

-address   the  threat  of  terrorism  and   militant   religious 
fundamentalism, both within Pakistan and internationally;

Road map for democracy

-publically  declare a road map for the restoration of  democracy 
that sets forth a firm time line and clear objectives;

-engage  in  broad  economic  reform  in  order  to  create   the 
conditions that will permit democratic reforms to take root;

-sign  the  Comprehensive  Test  Ban  Treaty  and  contribute  to 
international   efforts   to  control  the  spread   of   nuclear  
weapons;and

-ensure the political, religious and economic freedoms of all  of 
its citizens.

The Senators said, ``for five decades, Pakistan has been a  loyal 
and  trusted friend of the United States. However, for a  variety 
of reasons, this relationship is now at a crossroads''.
