
Bring hijackers to justice, Pak. told


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD,  JAN.  21.   The  United  States  today  bluntly  told 
Pakistan to locate and bring the hijackers of the Indian Airlines 
plane  to  Kandahar  to justice and asked Islamabad  to  rein  in 
`those  militant,  violent groups' that are  threatening  foreign 
nationals.

Addressing  a press conference at the end of his visit, the  U.S. 
Assistant  Secretary of State, Mr. Karl Indefurth, made it  amply 
clear that U.S. concerns on terrorism vis-a-vis Pakistan now  had 
the status of a `core issue' between the two countries.

Stating that the hijacking issue figured in his discussions  with 
the  Chief Executive, General. Pervez Musharraf and  the  Foreign 
Minister,  Mr. Abdul Sattar, today, Mr. Inderfurth said:  ``There 
is  a  clear  need  to take the next step  with  respect  to  the 
hijacking  which  is  to find the hijackers  and  bring  them  to 
justice.  We received assurances from the Government of  Pakistan 
that they have every intention to undertake such a mission.''

``We  urged them (the Pakistani Government) to make every  effort 
to  determine their (hijackers') location and to do that we  also 
informed  them  that  we, the United States,  will  make  that  a 
priority  as well.... and I know that having just  returned  from 
discussions in London with Indian officials they too have this as 
a priority,'' Mr. Indefurth said.

``I believe that the hijackers will be found. I believe that they 
cannot  simply disappear from the face of the earth and  I  think 
that  once  they are found and brought to justice  it  will  only 
underscore  the  message  that  actions like  this  will  not  be 
accepted by the international community in any shape,'' the  U.S. 
official said.

Asked whether the U.S. had asked Pakistan to crack down on groups 
such  as Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, Mr. Inderfurth said that the  U.S. 
had  ``expressed grave concern regarding terrorism stemming  from 
this  region  that  directly affect and  threaten  the  U.S.  and 
Pakistan  as well as the region and the world. We hope  that  the 
Government  of  Pakistan will take steps against  such  extremist 
groups  which carry out acts of violence inside Pakistan as  well 
as  in  the  region, including  the  HUA-HUM  (Harkat-ul-Ansar  - 
Harkat-ul-Mujahideen).''

``We  believe  that the presence and activities of  these  groups 
gives  Pakistan  a  bad international  reputation  in  the  world 
community and thus works against Pakistan's national interest.... 
as  our statement suggests the issue of terrorism was  our  first 
priority in our discussions... again we shared our concerns... we 
hope  that  actions  will  be  taken  to  address  this  because,  
fundamentally,  this  is  an  issue  which  we  believe   affects 
Pakistan's  long-term security interests as well as those of  the 
international community... we hope that every effort will be made 
to  address those militant, those violent, militant  groups  that 
are threatening citizens of other countries as well as the  long- 
term stability of Pakistan itself,'' Mr. Inderfurth maintained. 
