
Do not confuse means with ends: Bimal Jalan


By C.R.L. Narasimhan

MUMBAI. In a recent speech at the Administrative Staff College of 
India  (ASCI),  Hyderabad, the Reserve Bank Governor,  Dr.  Bimal 
Jalan,  has  placed  the roles of  financial  sector  reform  and 
liberalisation of markets in their correct perspective. There  is 
no  doubt  at all ``that financial reform and  liberalisation  of 
markets  are  necessary, essential and desirable  to  derive  the 
maximum  advantage  from the momentous changes  that  are  taking 
place  in  technology,  international  movement  of  capital  and 
comparative  advantage  of nations'', he had said in  a  talk  on 
Finance and Development.

However,  considering the problems that have arisen in East  Asia 
and  other  parts of the globe, we have to  learn  one  important 
message:  not  to  confuse ``means'' with  ``ends''.  ``In  other 
words, financial reform and liberalisation of the markets are the 
means  to  an  end and not ends in themselves.''  Since  the  RBI 
Governor was focussing on development issues, he had outlined the 
long  term  goals  of  a successful  development  strategy  as  a 
sustained  and rising income for all the people, and  removal  of 
poverty, deprivation and illiteracy within a reasonable period of 
time. (These goals have remained the same for a long time).

Since  inferences from the recent financial developments  suggest 
otherwise,  the  RBI  Governor was asked as  to  whether  such  a 
message - of means being confused with ends - has been understood 
in  the  reform era. Most of the financial  innovations  and  the 
introduction  of  new institutions and products  the  reform  era 
ought to have been understood as specific processes, the means to 
achieve  certain long term goals. Instead has there has not  been 
an   enormous  hype  on  each  occasion  that  might  have   been 
counterproductive to the very cause they serve to achieve? 

The  RBI  Governor does not think so. Citing the example  of  the 
share  dematerialisation facility (demat) - a very important  and 
highly  visible  step forward in capital market reform,  he  said 
that   the  demat  has  helped  investors,  the  companies,   the 
intermediaries and ultimately the capital market.

Similarly  all  worthwhile  reform measures  should  be  directed 
towards promoting are for promoting the efficiency of the system.

Small neglect, large consequences Dr. Jalan was asked to  comment 
on the devastation wrought on a very large number of investors in 
the  non-bank  financial  sector  -  NBFCs,  nidhis,   plantation 
companies  and so on. Of the several reasons attributable to  the 
large  failures,  one  relates  to  the  failure  of  regulation. 
Although  it  is  not the RBI that is responsible -  there  is  a 
multiplicity  of agencies, Company Law Board (CLB), the SEBI  and 
the  RBI - the fact that so many investors have  been  devastated  
ought to be a matter of concern.

Dr. Jalan had, referring to the South East Asian experience in an 
earlier speech talked to large negative consequences flowing from 
relatively  small  mistakes  in  their  macro-economic   decision 
making.  (For  example, faced with turbulence,  they  might  have 
persisted with a fixed exchange for a week or two longer than was 
necessary).  Will our apparent inability (so far) to check  large 
failures  in  the  non-bank financial system be  put  under  that 
category? Will it have catastrophic consequences too?

Depositors' nightmare 

Dr.  Jalan  who is fully sympathetic to the  investor  suffering, 
does  not think that there has been a systemic failure.  The  way 
out and to prevent recurrence is through investor education. They 
have  to  be told about the choice  available  between  different 
types of financial instruments and their risk profiles.

Obliquely  referring to the recent cut in the PPF and  the  small 
savings  he said that investors should also be made aware of  the 
fact  that nominal rates really do not reflect the true  returns. 
For  those in charge of macro-economic policy there is  always  a 
dilemma  between those who save and those who wish to invest.  It 
is  only  by looking at the real interest  rates  (nominal  rates 
adjusted for inflation) that investors can get a true picture.

According to Dr. Jalan, regulation and supervision are two  sides 
to  the  same coin. The latter is primarily to  ensure  that  the 
established   regulatory  rules  are  being  carried   out.   But 
regulation to be successful should not be micro-level regulation. 

Pointing   out   that   despite   the   growing    intermediation 
characterised  by  the  proliferation  of  marketable   financial 
instruments, non -food credit (in the traditional form) continues 
to  grow in absolute terms, Dr.Jalan conceded that some types  of 
borrowers  are  facing  difficulties with regard  to  the  credit 
delivery system.

The  delivery  systems are very slow, he said. The  only  way  to 
improve  is  to give much more power to the  branch,  reduce  red 
tape, simplify documentation and cultivate relationship. The  RBI 
has  already  taken  some  steps. One of them  is  to  set  up  a 
committee  of  bankers at the operational level  to  visit  areas 
where  small scale and export activity is concentrated  to  study 
the problems first hand. ``The feedback we have been receiving is 
so  somewhat  positive, but there is still some way to  go,''  he 
said.  About  fear  psychosis of bankers, he  said  that  it  was 
perhaps exaggerated at the operational levels.

In  the new millennium the RBI has worked out a plan for  itself; 
make  the  processes easier, more customer friendly  in  all  its 
traditional functions such as issue of coins and notes. The  RBI, 
according  to its Dr. Jalan, should get out of micro-  management 
and  concentrate on the big things, such as monetary  management,  
management  of the external sector and development  of  financial 
markets. Thirdly, the whole framework of the relationship between 
the  central bank and the market participants should become  much 
more  participative. Fourth, in terms of the human resources  the 
RBI has, it should become a top notch player in providing  inputs 
in   a  wide  area  such  as  market  research  and   macro   and 
microeconomic  data.  Fifth,is to  disseminate  such  information 
through the most user friendly means.

Dr.  Bimal  Jalan's tenure as the Governor of the  RBI  has  been 
marked by some significant achievements. The monetary policy  has 
been substantially demystified. The Bank has adopted a  proactive 
stance,  for instance while curbing speculation in  the  exchange 
market.  The  exchange  rate of the  rupee  has  been  remarkably 
steady.

Dr.  Jalan is as adept at conceptualising as he is  at  providing 
solutions to some common economic problems. One of the  important 
planks  of the RBI's new millennium policy is to emerge as a  top 
notch provider of inputs that would aid economic decision making.
