
Space launch costs will go down: ISRO chief 


By Our Staff Reporter

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  21. The Chairman of the Indian  Space  Research 
Organisation,  Dr.  K. Kasturirangan,  projected  a  `significant 
lowering'  of space launch costs in the country in the  next  few 
decades.

``While  the  cost for positioning one kilogram  of  material  in 
space  today  was $ 20,000, it was presaged that the  same  would 
come  down to $ 5,000 by 2007 and as low as $ 500 per kg  between 
2030 - 2050,'' he said. 

The  merger of various technologies coupled with  the  turnaround 
time of the launch - India presently launches on an average three 
space  vehicles per year - which was also expected to  come  down 
drastically  would all contribute to the reduction in the  launch 
costs. ``What more, the prospects of fully reusable vehicles  are 
within the realm of possibility,'' he said.

The  ISRO Chairman was speaking at the inaugural function of  the 
51st annual general meeting of the Aeronautical Society of  India 
(AeSI) and seminar on ``Advances in aerospace technologies'' here 
on Friday.

Dr.  Kasturirangan  said  the performance  efficiency  of  Indian 
spacecraft  was on the increase - their structural weights for  a 
given  performance  had gone down three fold,  the  power  system 
capability was upped by six times while the computational ability 
has  risen  by  a  very high of 50  times.  Similarly,  the  high 
resolution  and  information  storage/transfer  capabilities   of 
remote  sensing  satellites, propulsion  technologies,  computing 
etc,   had   all  registered  a  marked  upgradation.   He   said 
revolutionary  developments  in  the  fields  of   communication, 
information   and   micro  electronics   were   driving   greater 
convergence and forging new directions for aerospace  programmes. 
``Space  would  be  a  strong tool for  development  in  the  new 
millennium.  From  development  of  civic  applications  such  as 
personal  mobile communications at a global level and  management 
of  natural  disasters to futuristic vistas such as  space  power 
generation and space tourism, new possibilities are  unlimited,'' 
he  said.  ``Ground  systems would merely be  for  manning  these 
pathbreaking processes up there,'' he said. 

 ``With the strength of our high calibre human resources, we have 
shown  the  ability  to  develop  cost  effective  systems   with 
competitive  advantages. Through its capabilities  for  designing 
and developing world class satellites not to forget  applications 
relevant to societal development, the Indian space programme  has 
forayed  into the global space market and fostered  international 
cooperation,'' Dr. Kasturirangan said. He underlined the need for 
innovative  integration of traditional systems with modern  space  
technology  to  meet the demand for social needs in  rural  areas 
such as education, communications and sustainable use of  natural 
resources.

In concurrence, the Governor, Dr. C. Rangarajan, who  inaugurated 
the meeting, said technology has emerged as the principal driving 
force for longterm economic growth.
