
'Promote R&D; activities in telecom sector'


By Our Staff Reporter

BANGALORE,  JAN. 21. The Telephone Regulatory Authority of  India 
(TRAI)  held  its  last open-house consultations  here  today  on 
issues confronting the mobile phone services such as migration to 
the  revenue-sharing regime and Research and  Development  (R&D;). 
The  TRAI  was  disbanded  and a new  body  reconstituted  by  an 
Ordinance only on Wednesday night. 

The  TRAI  member,  Mr.  N.S.  Ramachandran,  called  for  R   &D; 
activities   in  the  telecom  sector  to  keep  pace  with   the 
technological changes. Though some of the members - both  service 
providers  and users were for and against R&D;,  Mr.  Ramachandran 
stressed  that  work  on  application  level  software  with  the 
specific  aim  of  providing  additional  application,  could  be 
focussed  upon. He stated that such an effort  would  drastically 
reduce the country's foreign exchange expenditure.

Customers  favoured  more players so that the  competition  would 
bring  down tariff and result in increased cellular  subscribers. 
The sharing of costs of universal service obligation and R&D; came 
in  for  a serious discussion. Most of them  wanted  a  clear-cut 
policy on this contentious issue.

On  the issue of lock-in period of five years for share  holders, 
there was a general view that this should be continued to  ensure 
the  commitment  of  service providers  towards  business.  While 
customers were vocal about lower tariff, the industry pointed out 
that there was no stable policy favouring higher investments  for 
improving infrastructure.

Today's  meeting  was part of a series of such sessions  held  in 
various cities such as Chennai, Calcutta, Delhi and Mumbai. There 
was a set of consulting papers, with questions on transition from 
the  licence  regime to the revenue-sharing  principle.  It  also 
heard the views of the customers, especially cell phone users.

That   confusion   prevailed  within  the  industry   about   the 
authority's status was borne out by the fact that there was  thin 
attendance at the meeting when compared to the earlier meetings. 
