
Right to Information Bill in Budget session: Jethmalani


By Our Legal Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  21.  The Right to  Information  Bill  will  be 
introduced  in  the Budget session of Parliament,  said  Mr.  Ram 
Jethmalani,  Union  Law  Minister  here  today.  Addressing   the 
participants at the national conference on Right to  Information, 
organised  by the Federation of Indian Chambers of  Commerce  and 
Industry  (FICCI),  he said the Bill, forming part of  the  NDA's 
manifesto,  would  have  the  effect  of  repealing  the  archaic 
Official  Secrets  Act. Besides, the new legislation  would  have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith  contained 
in any other law in force.

He  said the final draft of the Bill was ready and  examined  and 
approved  by  the  Cabinet  and  the  Department  of  Legislative 
Affairs.  A  few suggestions made by the members of  the  Cabinet 
were incorporated. He, however, added that the Bill was still  in 
the  draft  form  and  any  suggestions  and  improvements   were 
possible.

The  Minister said the Bill would be a proactive  and  futuristic 
legislation  which would uphold the citizens'  fundamental  right 
for   freedom  of  speech  and  expression  with   well   crafted 
exemptions. There were seven exemptions, as against 11  contained 
in  the US Act. ``The Bill proceeds on the assumption that  prima 
facie,  all  information have to be  disclosed  unless  otherwise 
withheld  in  the  public  interest,'' he  said  and  added  that 
sufficient safeguards had been provided to prevent its misuse.

Mr.  Jethmalani said the proposed legislation provides  only  for 
minimum  level of information the public officers would  have  to 
give  on public demand. It empowers the public servants  to  part 
with more information, including inspection and certified  copies 
of  the documents. The Bill provides for setting up an  Appellate 
Authority which could adjudicate the cases that crop up. 

Regarding  penalty for those public officers who deny  access  to 
information,  he said it was not expressly mentioned in the  Bill 
and this aspect would be reviewed. The appellate authority  would 
have the power to impose penalty on the erring officers.

Mr. Arun Jaitley, Information and Broadcasting Minister, said the 
secrecy  oriented part of the Official Secrets Act should go.  It 
had   a  colonial  undertone  and  belied  the  expectations   of 
democratic  society. He added that if public gaze was allowed  to 
keep  into the governmental functioning, there would  be  greater 
accountability  which shall enhance propriety and credibility  of 
the government.

Mr.  Justice B.P. Jeevan Reddy, Chairman of the  Law  Commission, 
said  the  urge for secrecy on the part of the government  was  a  
cover  for inefficiency, which in some cases led  to  corruption. 
This  was  expected  to  be  done  away  with  by  the   proposed 
legislation.

Mr.  Kuldip Nayar, eminent journalist said that  public  interest 
contained  in the proposed Bill should not be used as a garb  for 
withholding information by the government officials. He wanted  a 
great  degree of accountability on the part of media in order  to 
avoid misreporting or disseminating disinformation. 

Mr. B.G. Verghese, veteran journalist, said the mechanism  formed 
for  disclosure  of  information should not be  confined  to  the 
government  alone.  Private sector also should be asked  to  part 
with information in the same way as the government.
