
CPI opposes foreign investment in retail trade sector


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 21. The CPI has opposed a proposed move  to  throw 
open  the retail trade sector to foreign direct investment  (FDI) 
by  allowing  international retailers like Wal Mart and  Marks  & 
Spencer to open their retail chains in India, besides  cautioning 
the  Government  against permitting tobacco giants  including  an 
Indonesian   company,   Gundang  Garam  Tabak,   to   manufacture 
cigarettes in tax- haven States of the North-East. 

In a recent letter to the Prime Minister, Mr. A.B. Vajpayee,  the 
CPI  General  Secretary, Mr. A.B. Bardhan,  said  the  Government 
reportedly considering opening of the retail trade sector to  the 
FDI,  was  totally uncalled for and not in the interests  of  the 
country.  Spelling out some of the `disastrous  consequences'  of 
such  a move, Mr. Bardhan said that international retailers  with 
their  financial muscle will edge out the small and  family-owned 
retailers, putting 50 lakh retailers and 250 lakh dependents into 
unemployment.  A copy of Mr. Bardhan's letter was made  available 
here. 

Stating that all these international retailers will procure their 
consumer  goods  through their world sourcing  network,  the  CPI 
leader  said they could be effectively closing all the  marketing 
channels  for small and medium industries manufacturing  consumer 
goods.  Adverting  to  the U.K. experience in  this  regard,  Mr. 
Bardhan  said  that it appeared that the Office  of  Fair  Trade, 
U.K., has 

launched   an   investigation  into  the  operations   of   these 
international retailers ``about using their monopolistic position 
to squeeze the customers.''

Though the issue was taken up in Parliament, Mr. Bardhan said  it 
remained  unanswered and charged the Government with taking  this 
decision ``through the backdoor, without consulting anybody.'' He 
urged Mr. Vajpayee to personally intervene in the matter to  stop 
the move. 

Expressing  concern at the Indian beedi industry,  which  employs 
over  75  lakh people, being the latest target of the  MNCs,  the 
CPI's  central  organ  in an article has asked  the  Centre  that 
several  big tobacco companies ``waiting with applications''  for 
permitting  them to enhance capacities, should not be allowed  to 
manufacture mini-cigarettes. 
