
13 JD(U) MPs seek separate status


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 21. Even as the Vajpayee Government completed 100 
days  in office, a group of 13 Janata Dal(United) MPs in the  Lok 
Sabha  including the Defence Minister, Mr. George Fernandes,  and 
the  Union  Agriculture Minister, Mr. Nitish Kumar, met  the  Lok 
Sabha  Speaker,  Mr. G. M. C. Balayogi, early  today  and  sought 
recognition as a separate group in the House.

The  development followed the Election Commission's  decision  on 
Thursday to derecognise JD(U) MPs as office-bearers of the Samata 
Party  and  its refusal to take cognisance the `b forms'  of  the 
Samata  candidates  for  the Assembly  elections  signed  by  Mr. 
Fernandes.

New Samata chief

Simultaneously,  an  emergency meeting of the  Samata's  national 
executive  elected the general secretary, Mrs. Jaya  Jaitley,  as 
the new president to tide over the crisis arising out of the EC's 
decision. Mrs. Jaitley, who has been elected for a period of  six 
months,  will  be the authorised signatory vis-a-vis the  EC  and 
will sign the `b forms' of the party candidates for the  Assembly 
elections. The Commission has accepted the arrangement.

The group of JD(U) MPs were in such a hurry to move away from the 
shackles  of the parent organisation in the Lok Sabha  that  they 
reportedly  woke up Mr. Balayogi at 3 a.m. and sought  permission 
to rush to his official residence to present their representation 
to enable them sit as a separate group in the House.

While  ten MPs were present during the meeting with the  Speaker, 
three  other  MPs including the Minister of  State  for  Consumer 
Affairs  and  Public  Distribution,  Mr.  V.  Sreenivas   Prasad, 
telephoned Mr. Balayogi and confirmed their desire to be part  of 
the  new  group. The JD(U) appears to have been  caught  unawares 
over  the move by Mr. Sreenivas Prasad as he belonged to the  Lok 
Shakti which has since merged with the JD(U). 

According to sources in the Lok Sabha Secretariat, recognition of 
the new group might take a week.

Though  the  13 MPs have sought permission to sit as  a  separate 
group they cannot hope to be recognised as members of the  Samata 
Party.  ``For this purpose they will have to go to  the  Election 
Commission. The Speaker can at the most recognise them as a group 
of the Janata Dal(U)'', said a senior official.

While Mr. Nitish Kumar held the JD(U) leaders responsible for the 
EC's action, the JD(U) general secretary, Mr. M. Raghupathy, said 
the  Samata leaders had brought upon themselves the situation  by  
not paying heed to advice from friends.
