
TRAI ordinance by Monday 


By Sandeep Dikshit

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 21. Official sources are confident  that  there 
will  be  no  delay in promulgating  an  Ordinance  on  effecting 
changes  in the functions of the Telecom Regulatory Authority  of 
India.  Basing  their expectations on the clearance  given  to  a 
draft  by  the  Law Ministry today,  officials  assert  that  the 
promulgation  come  on  Monday. The draft has  now  gone  to  the 
Communications Ministry for processing from where it is  expected 
to go to the Prime Minister's Office.

Private  telecom companies were unrelenting in lobbying  for  the 
retention  of  the TRAI chief, Mr. Justice S.S.  Sodhi,  and  the 
Vice-Chairman,  Mr.  B.K. Zutshi. They are hoping  that  the  duo 
would  be retained - one in the TRAI and the other posted to  the 
proposed   dispute  redress  tribunal  -  in  the   interest   of 
continuity.

But  confidential  documents suggest that the Government  is  not 
particularly  enamoured of the current lot of TRAI  members.  The 
compelling  reason  behind  divesting the TRAI  of  its  judicial 
functions  was the possibility of bias in taking certain  crucial 
decisions in the future.

This  is  apparent  from the justification  given  by  the  Union 
Cabinet   for  bifurcating  the  TRAI.  ``As  the  TRAI  is   the 
recommendatory  authority for several actions to be taken by  the 
DoT, it would be inappropriate that the recommendatory  authority 
and  the  adjudicatory  authority  are  the  same.  In  order  to 
strengthen  investors' confidence and provide an independent  and 
high-power  body,  it is necessary to set up a  separate  dispute 
redressal body,'' said the Cabinet note on the subject.

Ironically, in seeking to set up a separate body to judge telecom 
disputes,  the  Government  used the  same  stick  of  ``investor 
confidence''  which  was  being  used by  the  apex  chambers  of 
commerce  in demanding suzerainty for the TRAI over  the  telecom 
sector.
