
High-speed Internet highway overcomes hurdles


By Sandeep Dikshit

NEW  DELHI, JAN 21. The recent visit by Dr. Raj Reddy, who  heads 
the U.S. President's task force on future technology, has given a 
fresh  lease of life to Sankhya Vahini, the ambitious  high-speed 
information  highway  for carrying Internet  traffic.  The  Union 
Cabinet  cleared  the project with the same  equity  holding  and 
conditions that were being objected to for the last six months. 

Aimed  at providing Internet access at 1,000 times the  currently 
available  speed in Chennai, New Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad  and 
Mumbai,  the  project was held up due to squabbling  between  the 
Government  and  its  joint  venture  partner,  Carnegie   Mellon 
University of the U.S.

Sankhya  Vahini  will  finally connect 10  cities  and  over  100 
universities and research centres as well as cater to high  band-
width  needs of commercial, manufacturing and financial  sectors. 
Internet  users will be able to access educational  content  from 
all leading U.S. and global scientific institutions.

It was originally scheduled to begin in June last year but  talks 
remained  frozen following reservations by officials over  giving 
49  per  cent of the equity to IU Net, an  associate  company  of 
Carnegie Mellon University which employs Dr. Reddy, said official 
sources. 

The  association of Dr. Reddy as well as  Professor  Arunachalam, 
another   don  from  the  same  university,  with  IU  Net,   was 
instrumental  in  getting the Cabinet to agree to  clear  such  a 
large shareholding to the University even though free real estate 
and  other  facilities  will be provided  by  the  Department  of 
Telecom Services. The DTS will also transfer 10,000 kms of a pair 
of optical fibre cable which will be adjusted in its 45 per  cent 
equity in Sankhya Vahini.

Officials  had  also objected to keeping the company out  of  the 
Government  fold  despite various  Central  departments  together 
holding 51 per cent of the equity. Overriding their protests, the 
Cabinet  decided  that  the  Government  rules  which  are  time- 
consuming  will not apply to the project. For instance,  the  Rs. 
1,400 crore capital intensive project will adhere to the purchase 
procedures  of  the University and not the tender  rules  of  the 
Government of India.

Official  sources said the Cabinet was told that the  Pittsburgh-
based University deserved such a large equity holding because  it 
was  among the three universities which possessed the  technology 
for transmission of data at extremely high speed. The  University 
had  agreed to transfer the required technology in return  for  a 
seizable stake in the joint venture.  

Apart  from  the  University and DTS,  the  Indian  Institute  of 
Technology  (IIT)  will hold four per cent and  the  Ministry  of 
Information  Technology  two per cent of the  stake.  All  equity 
holdings  will remain locked for five years to allow the  project 
to stabilise. 
