
Strike financed by mafia: Kumaramangalam 


NEW DELHI, JAN. 21. The Power Minister, Mr. P.R.  Kumaramangalam, 
has  said that the nearly week-long strike by the  Uttar  Pradesh 
State  Electricity  Board (UPSEB) staff and  engineers  has  been 
sustained and financed by a mafia and if it continues UPSEB would 
be   referred   to  the  Board  for  Industrial   and   Financial 
Restructuring (BIFR). 

``The  mafia  is mainly responsible for the power  theft  in  the 
State  amounting  to Rs. 1,500 crores each year,''  the  Minister 
said. In an exclusive interview to the UNI, he said peaking power 
had come down to 1560 mw on January 15 and it is now 4,200 mw  as 
on January 20 which is back to normal. Assuring that there is  no 
danger   to  the  ``Northern  Grid  yet,''   Mr.   Kumaramangalam 
said,``northern  India  has enough power with a high  Plant  Load 
Factor (PLF) in thermal and over-generation in hydel power.''

``The main problem is maintaining this and the mafia in the UPSEB 
is  not allowing this to happen,'' Mr. Kumaramangalam  said.  The 
UPSEB employees, who are protesting against the notification  for 
trifurcating  the  State Electricity Board  into  three  separate 
companies,  are ``not worried about privatisation but  of  fixing 
responsibilities and accountability,'' the Minister pointed  out. 
``The  revenue  recovery is today less than 20  per  cent  amidst 
mounting  transmission  and distribution losses,'' he  said.  The 
Minister revealed that the Centre was aware that a strike was  in 
the  offing and it had placed all the necessary back-ups to  meet 
the  eventuality. ``We even allowed the strike to  take  place,'' 
Mr. Kumaramangalam said. 

Asked if the restructuring of the UPSEB through trifurcation  for 
eventual  privatisation  was the only solution for all  the  ills 
plaguing the power sector, he said ,``this is not the only model, 
what  matters  is  pragmatism  and  efficiency  in  running   the 
boards.'' 

Citing the example of New Delhi where the tariffs range from  Rs. 
3  to  Rs. 1.60, Mr. Kumaramangalam said, if  DVB  (Delhi  Vidyut 
Board)  is  willing  to reform through a  joint  venture  system, 
thefts could be reduced from the current 45 per cent losses which 
is  around  Rs.  750 crores. This would also  mean  reduction  in 
tariffs to ``a flat Rs. 2.''

``We will get a tariff that is reasonable and transparent,''  Mr. 
Kumaramangalam  said.  Today three States - Haryana,  Orissa  and 
Andhra  Pradesh  - are en route to privatisation.  Karnataka  and 
Maharashtra   are   talking  about  entering  into  an   MoU   on 
restructuring of its power sector, the Minister said. 

Mr.  Kumaramangalam acknowledged the fact that the strike  was  a 
jolt  to the ongoing restructuring process. A recent  World  Bank 
study had stated that as a first step there would be creation  of  
three   corporations,   by  splitting  the  single   UPSEB   into 
transmission,   generation  and  distribution  and   establishing 
subsidiaries.  This  would be done by further  dividing  the  new 
corporations into separate legal entities. 
