
CPI(M) allotted 21 seats in Bihar 


By Our Staff Correspondent

PATNA,  JAN.  21.  While  all the  major  political  parties  are 
indulging  in  a  cat-and-mouse game withholding  their  list  of 
candidates, the agreement reached between the RJD and the  CPI(M) 
today,  however, makes it clear that the Left parties would  take 
on  candidates  of  the  National  Democratic  Alliance  and  the 
Congress(I) in at least 21 Assembly constituencies.

The  RJD  president,  Mr.  Laloo Prasad  Yadav,  and  the  CPI(M) 
politburo member, Mr. Sitaram Yechury, jointly released the  list 
of  seats  the  CPI(M)  would  be  contesting  in  the   Assembly 
elections.  According to the agreement, the CPI(M) would  contest 
21 constituencies, where it would be supported by the RJD.

Of  these 21 seats, the CPI would be contesting either  with  the 
CPI or the CPI(ML), both of which have an electoral tie-up, in as 
many  as 18 constituencies. Notwithstanding the fact  that  these 
Left  parties  would be clashing against each other in  these  18 
constituencies,  the crucial aspect of it was that they would  be 
directly taking on the challenge of the NDA and the Congress(I).

Of  course, the CPI(M) would be doing so with the support of  the 
RJD.  It  would not be bothered by the CPI or the  CPI(M)  in  at 
least  three constituencies in its fight against the NDA and  the 
Congress(I).

The  CPI(M)  is  contesting  all  the  six  seats  it  represents 
currently  and has fielded a candidate each against  the  sitting 
MLAs   of  the  CPI  and  the  CPI(ML)  in  Barauni  and   Mairwa 
respectively.  The  CPI and the CPI(ML) have  fielded  candidates 
against all the six sitting MLAs of the CPI(M).

Interestingly,  CPI(M)  too has decided to field  its  candidates 
against  the  two  sitting MLAs of the MCC which  would  have  to 
contend even with the CPI(ML) in these two constituencies.  While 
the CPI and the CPI(ML) had accused the MCC of having an alliance 
with  the RJD and the CPI(M), the latter today charged  that  the 
MCC was with the former.

The  CPI(ML)  alone has so far released its first  list  but  for 
obvious reasons kept its options open on one of the seats of  the 
MCC,  perhaps still hoping to reach an agreement with it. On  the 
other  hand, Mr. Yadav maintained that he had allotted it to  the 
CPI(M) and it was upto the CPI(M) to tap or leave the MCC alone.

Mr.  Yechury  described as unfortunate the clash among  the  Left 
parties  saying  the CPI had given scope for his party  to  avoid 
such a clash. He accused the CPI of adopting an action plan which 
would benefit the `communal forces'.

The CPI(ML) leader, Mr. Prabhat Kumar, said his party was opposed 
to  the  RJD as a matter of principle and that  the  party  would 
stand by its own alliance.

But for the CPI(ML), none of the parties have come out with their 
lists   though  their  candidates  have  started   filing   their 
nominations,  the  last date for which is January 24.  Mr.  Yadav 
said   he   would  be  releasing  his  party's   list   for   108 
constituencies going to the polls in the first phase tomorrow.

Mr.  Yadav  apparently, like the Congress(I) and the  other  Left 
parties,  is  waiting for the NDA to reach an agreement  on  seat 
sharing.

Even  in the case of an alliance, the constituency allotted to  a 
particular  allay  would  have a crucial  bearing  on  the  caste 
equations  of  the constituency concerned and the  rival  parties 
would chart their own strategy accordingly.

The  BJP had promised to release its first list on  Tuesday,  but 
has  failed  to do even thought the deadline is just  three  days 
away.  The RJD is also keeping a tab on the  developments  within 
the JD(U).

Mr.  Yadav charged that the haggling within the NDA  showed  that 
the  combine  had  intended  to grab power  in  Bihar  through  a 
conspiracy by raising the bogey of ``jungle raj''.
