
'Govt. yielded to U.S. on QRs phasing out' 


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  21.  The Vajpayee  Government  seems  to  have 
succumbed  to  the  United States on the  issue  of  phasing  out 
quantitative restrictions (QRs) on the import of 1,429 items.

As  is known by now, India would be phasing out QRs on 714  items 
by  April  1, 2000 and another 715 items by April  1  next  year, 
which  is two to three years shorter than the six-year  phase-out 
period  that  India has negotiated with other countries.  It  now 
appears  that  the U.S. too had agreed to a six-year  phase-  out 
period,  but  the present Government could not cash  in  on  this 
commitment which came from the highest quarter in the U.S.

Like  the U.S., the European Union, Canada, Japan  and  Australia 
had objected to the original Indian position that QRs on  imports 
from  these  countries  would be phased out  by  2005.  Bilateral 
discussion  with these countries continued for some time  and  by 
1997,  India  successfully negotiated with  these  countries  and 
agreed  to a six-year phase-out period ending 2003. The U.S.  was 
the sole exception. 

It now turns out that the U.S. did eventually come around to  the 
six-year   period  after  intervention  at  the  highest   level. 
According  to  the former Finance Minister, Mr.  P.  Chidambaram, 
this happened when the then Prime Minister, Mr. I.K. Gujral,  and 
Mr. Chidambaram met the U.S. President, Mr. Bill Clinton, in  New 
York  in September-October 1997. During that meeting, Mr.  Gujral 
made a special request to Mr. Clinton that India needed at  least 
six years to prepare its industry for the phasing out of QRs.  He 
also  informed the U.S. President about the agreement with  other 
countries.

According to Mr. Chidambaram, within three days of that  meeting, 
the Indian Ambassador to the World Trade Organisation reported to 
the  Government  that he had received word from the U.  S.  Trade 
Representative  that the U.S. would agree to a transition  period 
of  six years, but would like to negotiate the front-loading  and 
back-loading (that is, which items would be phased out first  and 
which  later)  and  build  it  into  the  agreement.  ``The   BJP 
Government  should  have picked up the thread from where  it  was 
left by the United Front Government,'' Mr. Chidambaram has said.

While  making  it clear that he was not against the  decision  to 
lift  the QRs, Mr. Chidambaram, however, said it seemed that  the 
Vajpayee Government had failed to persuade the U.S. on the front-
loading and back-loading process and made a crucial concession of 
two-three years in the transition time. This, in turn, would have 
a  serious impact on Indian industry which finds  its  transition 
time   considerably  reduced  and  would  have  to  face  up   to 
competition from imports almost immediately. 

The  manner in which the agreement was reached with the U.S.  has 
also come in for criticism from many quarters. The first point is 
that the agreement was announced by the U.S. and no  announcement 
was  made by the Indian officials. Secondly,  many  organisations 
have objected to the fact that a crucial agreement like this  was 
negotiated and finalised at the level of an Additional  Secretary 
in the Commerce Ministry. 

It  also transpires that the agreement between the two  countries 
was  finalised  well  before its official  announcement  by  U.S. 
officials  and its entry into force was decided to be a  date  by 
which  the on-going winter session of Parliament was to be  over. 
Demands  have  now  been made that the agreement  be  debated  in 
Parliament  before  it  is  implemented so  that  an  element  of 
transparency is introduced in this important trade agreement.
