
'Pak. Navy was not prepared' 


By Arunkumar Bhatt

MUMBAI,  JAN. 21. The Pakistani Navy was not at all prepared  for 
war  last year as Gen. Pervez Musharraf had not taken  his  naval 
counterpart into confidence, before troops entered Kargil.  Hence 
Islamabad's  order  to  its navy to marshal  all  home-bound  oil 
tankers in a convoy and escort them, fearing Indian action, was a 
surprise. They soon discovered that the Indian Navy was ahead  of 
them in the game.

On the contrary, the chiefs of the Indian Army, the Navy and  the 
Air Force took a comprehensive view of all aspects of the  Kargil 
situation  and  put in action a plan, aimed  at  giving  Pakistan 
strong  signals and even tactical surprises in  case  hostilities 
broke out, said the Director-General of Coast Guard, Vice Admiral 
John  D'Silva,  today onboard CGS Sarang,  an  advanced  offshore 
patrol vessel. 

The Pakistani Navy was told that it would have to guard against a 
possible  blockade  of  its ships; it was dismayed  to  find  the 
Indian Navy right at its choke points, particularly its sea lanes 
of communication. 

Pakistan's  reaction was rather knee-jerk when it  realised  that 
all merchant ships, including tankers, expected to arrive at  the 
Pakistani  ports  through the Arabian Sea and even  the  Gulf  of 
Oman, were already under Indian surveillance, particularly by the 
Dornier patrol aircraft of Coast Guard, he said. 

The  Pakistani  General  was  made to  see  the  point  that  his 
country's  civil military oil consumption ratio was one  to  one, 
said  Admiral  D'Silva, as against India's 15 to one.  This  made 
Gen.  Musharraf agree to withdraw and the Pakistani  naval  chief 
quit soon thereafter, he added.

Admiral  D'Silva, who earlier commanded the Western Fleet of  the 
Navy,  said  the  Coast Guard patrol  vessels  and  aircraft  had 
monitored  about  300  merchantmen  -  their  point  of   origin, 
destination, cargo and nationalities of crew - and shortlisted 20 
to  25  ships  which  would have  been  prevented  from  reaching 
Pakistani ports, ``had the balloon gone up''.

The Coast Guard's main role was to police the territorial  waters 
and the Exclusive Economic Zone during peacetime. The Coast Guard 
shifted its aircraft from its Chennai Air Station to Daman on the 
West Coast. Its ships and aircraft sanitised the Saurashtra Coast 
off Gujarat, Gulf of Kutch and even the Bombay High. This enabled 
the Navy to deploy its assets forward, Admiral D'Silva said.
