
CDU finance chief commits suicide 


By Batuk Gathani 

BRUSSELS, JAN. 21 The crisis and scandal engulfing Germany's main 
Opposition  party,  the  Christian  Democratic  Union  (CDU)  has 
deepened further, as the person who managed its finances has been 
found dead in his Berlin apartment. 

Mr.  Huellen  (49),  father of two boys aged 11  and  16,  hanged 
himself  on Thursday morning leaving an apparent suicide note  in 
which he cited `personal reasons' for his action. Mr. Huellen was 
CDU's  so-called finance manager and he also managed funds  which 
the party received from the German Government. 

His  suicide comes in the middle of a worsening scandal which  is 
shaking  the  roots  and fast damaging  the  credibility  of  the 
political  establishment.  The police are now  investigating  Mr. 
Huellen's death and looking for connections with the scandal. 

The  German Parliament called for a recess when the news  of  the 
death  came,  as parliamentarians were seen  investigating  fresh 
reports  of  alleged money-laundering, illegal  slush  funds  and 
possible  bribery. The CDU affair is fast turning  into  post-war 
Germany's worse scandal. 

A spokesman of the parliamentary committee is today quoted saying 
that  evidence  was  accumulating  to  suggest  that  the  former 
Chancellor, Mr. Helmut Kohl, and the Christian Democrats received 
funds that were connected to decision making while in power. 

For many Germans, it is tempting to interpret this as the  ruling 
party's rhetoric to run down the Opposition party, but it is also 
a  reality that a vast number of Germans are  both  disillusioned 
and  disenchanted with what they read and hear about the  scandal 
and Mr. Kohl's role in it. 

Hence,  it is argued that despite the resignation in disgrace  of 
Mr.  Kohl  as  the CDU's honorary chairman  this  week,  the  CDU 
continues  to loose popularity and credibility, with lowest  poll 
ratings. 

The  former  party secretary-general, whom Mr. Kohl  had  sacked, 
said  that  Mr.  Kohl should resign his  parliamentary  seat  and 
describes  the  current  scandal as a `catastrophe  for  CDU  and 
Germany'.

Mr.  Kohl yesterday avoided the German Parliament  and,  speaking 
outside his Berlin home, accused journalists of pursuing a `round 
the clock witch hunt.' 

The  Green party leader and Foreign Minister, Mr.  Fischer,  said 
the  CDU and Kohl scandals highlighted the collapse of the  `Bonn  
republic' - a reference to the former German capital which is now 
replaced by Berlin since middle last year. 

Many   reputations   may   be  damaged   as   the   parliamentary 
investigating committee intends to call 26 witnesses, which would 
include  Germany's former longest serving Foreign  Minister,  Mr. 
Genscher, the former Finance Minister, Mr. Waigal and Mr. Kohl.
