
Israel, Syria moving forward 


By Kesava Menon

MANAMA  (BAHRAIN),  JAN.  21. The  impasse  in  the  negotiations 
between  Syria and Israel, though worrisome, is  not  calamitous, 
seems  to  be the view in West Asia. As the U.S.  President,  Mr. 
Bill  Clinton  has  stated, there is  the  immediate  problem  of 
sequencing  the  issues to be negotiated and there  is  also  the 
perennial fear that the two sides will not be able to summon  the 
will  to  surmount the hostility of the past 50  years.  The  two 
sides  appear  to have shown the inclination to  move  towards  a 
compromise though they have not actually taken a step forward. 

Despite  a  news  blackout on the negotiations,  a  leak  to  the 
Israeli  newspaper Haaretz, saw the publication of the  ``working 
paper''  which  Mr.  Clinton and his aides had drawn  up  at  the 
conclusion  of the negotiations. As per the report in  Haaretzthe 
working paper is a draft agreement with a preamble and  articles. 
The  points on which there is disagreement is in parenthesis.  In 
essence,  the working paper is what Mr. Clinton said he  intended 
it  to be - a document which sets out the areas of agreement  and 
also  the differences which remain to be bridged so that  further 
negotiations  can be planned accordingly. However, there is  some 
uneasiness that the U.S. has made the document a draft  agreement 
instead of leaving it as a simpler discussion paper. 

One  of the most crucial facts that the document reveals is  that 
Israel  has given up its insistence that the border  between  the 
two countries should be the same as laid down in the  Sykes-Picot 
agreement  of 1923. By this agreement, the two  imperial  powers, 
the  U.K.  and  France, divided the Levant,  with  France  taking 
charge of the Syrian and Lebanese provinces of the Turkish empire 
and Britain taking Palestine (including present- day Israel)  and 
Trans-Jordan. Israel had insisted that the 1923 line, which would 
leave  the  Sea  of Galilee well within its  borders,  should  be 
treated as the legitimate border.

While the Israeli position does not preclude their argument  that 
they  should  retain a presence on the Golan  Heights,  the  non-
mention  of  the  1923 lines looks significant on  the  basis  of 
several  other  considerations.  Yediot  Ahornot  (though  it  is 
considered less reliable than Haartez) reported that the  Israeli 
Prime Minister, Mr. Ehud Barak had assured Mr. Clinton in October 
last  year that he would agree to the recognition of the June  4, 
1967  line  as  the border. This newspaper report  is  backed  by 
several  commentative articles which suggest that Mr.  Barak  and 
his  close  associates have reconciled to the 1967 line.  If  Mr. 
Barak has indeed agreed to the 1967 borders, which runs below the 
escarpment  of the Golan plateau, then he has virtually  conceded 
the main Syrian demand that Israel return the whole of the Golan. 
There is apparently scope for flexibility since the line was  not 
fully  demarcated  between 1948 (when Syria advanced  beyond  the  
1923  line)  and  1967. There was  apparently  only  a  patchwork 
mapping,  understandable given the conditions of armistice  which 
then prevailed.

If Israel has shown some flexibility on the question of  borders, 
Syria  too  is  seen to be not rigid on  matters  of  concern  to 
Israel.  For instance, the ``working paper'' seems to make  clear 
that  Syria  will  permit a military observation  post  on  Mount 
Hermon  even  after they re-possess it. The  difference  is  that 
Syria  wants the observation post to be manned solely  by  French 
and  U.S.  personnel while Israel desires that they too  have  an 
``effective presence'' in this monitoring facility. 

Moreover, in the article relating to normalisation of  relations, 
Syria  (as per the working paper) is seen to be in  almost  total 
agreement   with   Israel   that  there   should   be   wholesale 
normalisation once other differences are overcome. 

Both   sides  appear  to  have  got  some  satisfaction  in   the 
negotiations.  Syria  has made some progress towards  having  the 
1967  border recognised and Israel's main concerns in respect  of 
security  and  normalisation appear to have been met.  But  Syria 
appears to believe that the publication of the ``working  paper'' 
in  Haaretz,  which  was bound to rouse  domestic  opposition  in 
Israel,  was a ploy by the Israeli Government to back off from  a 
firm commitment. They have, therefore, insisted that Israel  give 
a written commitment on recognising the 1967 border as the  final 
one. Israel is not prepared to give such a commitment. 
