
U.S. backs Jakarta on rights probe 


By P. S. Suryanarayana 

SINGAPORE,  JAN. 21. The U.S. Secretary of State,  Ms.  Madeleine 
Albright,  today  said that the Clinton Administration  would  be 
fully  supportive  of  the current  transition  to  democracy  in 
Jakarta.  She  held out the assurance to the  Indonesian  Foreign 
Minister,  Mr. Alwi Shihab, when he called on her in  Washington. 
The  assurance came even as the civilian leadership  looked  like 
having  gained  the upper hand over  the  military  establishment 
(TNI).

Ms. Albright said the U.S. would be willing to grant Jakarta some 
more  time to try and investigate on its own the  allegations  of 
massive  human  rights  abuses by the  so-called  rogue  elements 
within the TNI in East Timor prior to its recent separation  from 
Indonesia. 

The Abdurrahman Wahid administration in Jakarta is opposed to the 
idea of allowing the U.N. to constitute an international tribunal 
to  probe the Indonesian generals in regard to the  recent  anti-
independence carnage in East Timor. 

Ms.  Albright's  assurance must please Jakarta as the talk  of  a 
putsch by the TNI against Mr. Wahid was traceable to the move for 
a  probe  against some Indonesian military  officials  for  their 
alleged  misdeeds on the human rights front over several  decades 
and in several places. 

The assurance, the latest move by the U.S., which first sounded a 
diplomatic  alarm against the possibility of a military  coup  in 
Indonesia, addressed the concerns of the Wahid administration  in 
regard to its keenness, as a matter of both principle and policy, 
about protecting national sovereignty and retaining in  Jakarta's 
own hands the right to probe its generals.

Ms. Albright also assured Mr. Alwi of substantial U.S.'  economic 
assistance to Jakarta. The U.S. Treasury Secretary, Mr.  Lawrence 
Summers,  said in Jakarta during a hurried visit there  that  the 
U.S. would catalyse huge bilateral and multilateral financial aid 
to  the  Wahid  administration if it were  to  undertake  massive 
economic and political reforms. 

The  offer  by  Mr. Summers would also  help  unfreeze  upto  $10 
billions  of multilateral aid through the International  Monetary 
Fund, according to independent estimates. 

The IMF also entered into an agreement with the Wahid  Government 
on a new economic plan for a democratising Indonesia.

Mr.  Alwi said that Jakarta would not countenance  the  movements 
for  independence  in  either  Aceh  or  Irian  Jaya  (Papua)  or  
elsewhere under its jurisdiction. According to him, the fear of a 
``domino  effect''  was at the root of this policy.  However,  he 
said,  Indonesia was willing now to enter into dialogue with  the 
separatists within this framework.

The latest indications in Jakarta today were that Mr. Wahid might 
visit  Aceh  early  next week to preside  over  a  reconciliation 
meeting said to be open to separatist leaders too. He had at  the 
same   time   instructed   the   Vice-President,   Ms.   Megawati 
Sukarnoputri, to travel to Ambon for another attempt at restoring 
sustainable  peace  in the Spice Islands, the scene  of  communal 
violence for over a year. 

On  the  political front in Jakarta, the Chief of  Staff  of  the 
Army,  Gen.  Tyasno  Sudarto, said that  he  had  instructed  the 
military and police commanders to take concerted steps to prevent 
the outbreak of communal clashes in Jakarta. 

He  reminded  them  that the  1998  anti-ethnic-Chinese  communal 
rioting in Jakarta had led to the downfall of the then Indonesian 
government headed by Gen. Suharto.
