
DMK leaves Aranthangi to MGR ADMK 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 21. The DMK will contest the by-elections  to  the 
Tiruchi-II and Nellikuppam Assembly constituencies, scheduled for 
February 17, leaving the third constituency - Aranthangi - to MGR 
ADMK, one of the partners in the state-level National  Democratic 
Alliance. 

A  decision  to  this effect was taken at a meeting  of  the  NDA 
partners held at the DMK headquarters here today.

The Chief Minister and DMK president, Mr.Karunanidhi, who chaired 
the  meeting, told mediapersons that the names of the  candidates 
for Tiruchi-II and Nellikuppam constituencies would be  announced 
after  consultations  with  the  party's  general  secretary  and 
Education   Minister,   Mr.K.Anbazhagan.  Leaders  of   the   NDA 
constituents  would allot a day for a joint campaign in  each  of 
the three constituencies going to the polls. 

Mr.Karunanidhi  dismissed reports in the media  about  resentment 
among DMK partymen consequent to the party's decision to  enforce 
the norm of `one man one post'. ``There is no resignation by  any 
Minister nor is there any revolt in the party'', he said charging 
the media with creating confusion among partymen. 

The decision to bar Ministers and MPs from contesting the post of 
district  secretaries and union presidents in the  ongoing  party 
organisational elections was taken in the overall interest of the 
party.  How  could  Ministers  and MPs get  tied  up  with  their 
official  work, find time and energy to sort out problems in  the 
party at district levels? he argued.

He  did  not  see  anything amiss  in  the  decision  that  those 
contesting  for  the posts of secretary or  deputy  secretary  at 
district,  city  and union levels should not hold more  than  one 
post  in  local  bodies or cooperatives etc. Nor  was  there  any 
significance  in  increasing the number of party  district  units 
from  32  to 50. It was all done for administrative  reasons,  he 
said.  It  was one of the reasons,  Mr.Krunanidhi  conceded  when 
asked whether the enforcement of `one man one post' had  anything 
to  do  with  the report submitted  by  the  party's  five-member 
committee  which reviewed the DMK's performance in the  last  Lok 
Sabha  elections.  How did the cadre react to the  `one  man  one 
post' norm? asked a reporter. ``They have wholeheartedly accepted 
it'', Mr.Karunanidhi said.

Responding to a question on the State's decision on uniform sales 
tax,  the  Chief  Minister  said the  Centre  had  accepted  some 
suggestions  made  by Tamil Nadu. The State Cabinet  proposed  to 
meet  on January 23 and a decision would be taken to ensure  that 
farmers  and the general public were not hit by any  increase  in  
sales tax, he said.

Mr.Karunanidhi  said the Government would prefer an appeal  in  a 
day  or two in the Supreme Court against the Madras High  Court's 
judgment on the TANSI land case. On his continued description  of 
the  TMC as the Opposition party and not as an  `opponent  party' 
inspite  of  allegations  levelled against  the  DMK,  the  Chief 
Minister  said ``the TMC is run by my friend. It is  a  different 
issue whether it is a friendly party or not''.

``I do not see anything wrong in attending a memorial  meeting'', 
he said, when a reporter referred to the TMC's decision to permit 
the AIADMK to organise a condolence meeting for  V.R.Nedunchezian 
at Kamaraj Hall in Teynampet on February 2 and the TMC president, 
Mr.G.K.Moopanar's decision to participate in the meeting.

Mr.Karunanidhi  said  the NDA allies in the State would  meet  at 
least once a month to sort out problems through discussions.
