
Scheme to churn out 'little doctors' 


By M. Dinesh Varma

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, JAN. 21. The next time you need to check your 
blood  pressure or urine sugar, help will be much closer at  hand 
than you imagine... perhaps at the school nearest to you.

A novel initiative to train school children on simple aspects  of 
clinical  evaluation  and management of medical  emergencies  has 
been  conceived  involving  various  departments  including   the 
Planning  Board,  the  Thiruvananthapuram  Corporation  and   the 
Education Department.

The ``citizens of tomorrow'' may as well turn out to be  reliable 
``little  doctors''  of  the  future,  as  the  scheme  envisages 
providing medical support systems to the community at the  school 
level.

As  conceived by the project, a core group of children,  carrying 
certificates  of  the  Medical Cadet Corps  issued  by  the  city 
Corporation, would adopt multiple `clinician' roles ranging  from 
checking  blood  pressure of cardiac patients,  looking  out  for 
classical  symptoms of cardiac ailment - such as bilateral  odema 
(swelling  of  legs)  coupled  with  breathing  difficulty  among 
members of the family, or even conducting a urine sugar test  for 
diabetics in the neighbourhood during leisure hours at school.

The  basic  aim of the programme is to  ``promote  public  health 
through  the  health  of the family through  the  health  of  the 
child''. In the long-term, the programme aims to develop `Medical 
Cadet Corps' (MCC) along the lines of the National Cadet Corps. 

And just like NCC cadets are being drafted into civic duties such 
as  helping  police  man  traffic or  assist  managers  of  youth 
festivals,  the MCC candidates would be called in to help out  in 
cases  of  emergencies  such  as a flood  or  an  outbreak  of  a 
communicable  disease  or  even assist  conduct  of  immunisation 
programmes, medical camps or family planning campaigns.

According to sources, though the project was included as part  of 
the  People's  Plan  Campaign  last  year,  delay  in  finalising 
modalities led to a spill-over to the current year.

Personal hygiene, environmental sanitation and providing  primary 
care   are  part  of  the  ``syllabus''.  The  tips  range   from 
prescribing  a common fever drug like paracetamol  to  frequently 
turning around a bed-confined hemiplegic patient to avoid sores.

``The investment on educating a child on these aspects has  ample 
reward,''  points  out Dr. G. Harikumar, Assistant  Surgeon,  MLA 
Hostel Health Clinic, and conceiver of the project. According  to 
him, once a child is imparted practically-oriented knowledge,  he  
or she carries the message for the rest of the life.

Besides demystifying the simpler aspects of medicine, the project 
attaches  emphasis to providing medical inputs with  a  practical 
orientation  and correcting prevalent misconceptions about  first 
aid  methods. For instance, while it is common knowledge that  in 
the  case  of getting a burn, one must wash the spot  in  running 
water,  very few know that the washing must be done for 20 to  30 
minutes to be effective. 

Once  the programme gets going, patients, particularly  those  in 
rural communities, would be able to get a routine blood  pressure 
or  urine  sugar check conducted at the local school  instead  of 
spending  money  at a laboratory. Teachers have  been  placed  as 
overall supervisors to improve reliability of the readings.

At present, it is proposed to mobilise a core group of around  25 
children  from each school to be medical corps. According to  Dr. 
Harikumar, this core group would be provided intensive  training. 
``Utilising  the services of these little doctors, we could,  for 
instance, teach them to screen the entire students of the  school 
for eye ailments using a basic Snellen's chart.''

The  next  phase  of training for schoolers  is  expected  to  be 
launched on January 26. 
