
Ripping into music money 


``SONGS, INSTEAD of complete albums'' is the predicted nature  of 
music  selling in future. Music giants and  online  conglomerates 
have  lined up plans for selling music this way. But, all in  the 
West.

This is the world of MP3 and the universal music mall they target 
is  the Internet. Whether it is by design or chance,  Tamil  film 
songs too have found a place in this sprawling virtual shop. 

Tamil  film songs are one of the most commonly  available  Indian 
MP3  content over the Internet. Songs from the latest  films  are 
now  available  in  MP3 format over the Net  and  can  be  freely 
downloaded. 

Unlike  the  music  from  badly  pirated  audio-cassettes,  music 
duplicated in MP3 form is of digital quality and is convenient to 
play. Dial up to the Net, download and play over and over  again. 
No  cassette  or CD, and most of the time, no  separate  hardware 
other than the computer.

Though MP3 became a rage only in the recent past, there are  tens 
of  sites  that provide Tamil songs in the MP3 format,  that  too 
from  the latest films. Interestingly, none of them is run by  an 
established  name or music company, but by amateurs of the  Tamil 
Diaspora all over the world. The user saves not only on the  cost 
of  the  CD, but also on shelf-space. Convenience of usage  is  a 
bonus.

At  all the sites, the songs are well organised and the user  can 
download  song by song. While in the conventional way, one  needs 
to  buy the entire album even if one wants to listen to a  single 
song,  over the Net it could be song-specific. Just download  the 
song of one's preference.

Another  advantage  are  the features of  new  MP3  players,  the 
mandatory  software  packages that are required to  play  MP3  in 
computers,  that  are now available. Using  high-utility  graphic 
equalisers  one can alter the quality of music in a way which  is 
not possible in the conventional CD/cassette players. 

Interestingly,  the  MP3 songs reflect the market  situation  and 
A.R.Rahman  is  the top favourite, whether it  is  ``Thevaker's'' 
collection ``Mohan's TamilMP3 collection,'' followed by Ilayaraja 
and S. A. Raj Kumar. Almost all Rahman songs are now downloadable 
and the file size ranges from 2 mb to 3 mb which takes about five 
minutes  to ten minutes to download depending upon the  speed  of 
dial-up connection. 

However,  unlike  the  West, unauthorised  duplication  and  free 
distribution of music over the Net has not caused any anxiety  to 
the local music industry as yet. ``It is just a minuscule part of  
the market,'' said a leading music producer. Industry sources say 
that  the  scale of distribution and use of  MP3  is  negligible. 
``But it will be a part of our strategy in future,'' he says.

If ``MP3'' is the most searched word after ``sex'' over the  Net, 
a query for ``Tamil MP3'' can bring forth a surprising number  of 
sites. And the number is growing.

(By G. Pramod Kumar)
