
NDA partners to hold rally in Cuddalore 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI, JAN. 21. Even as the PMK and the Dalit Panthers of India 
traded  charges  following the murder of a PMK  functionary,  the 
Chief  Minister  and  DMK president,  Mr.  M.  Karunandhi,  today 
persuaded  the PMK to give up its bandh planned for  tomorrow  in 
the Cuddalore district on the issue.

The  meeting  of the partners of the NDA,  while  condemning  the 
murder,  decided  to hold a rally in Cuddalore on February  2  to 
condemn  the violence instead of organising a bandh. All the  NDA 
partners have decided to participate in the rally.

Chaired  by  Mr.  Karunanidhi, the meeting  passed  a  resolution 
condemning the murder of PMK activist, Murugan, at Thittakudi  on 
January 17. The meeting also cautioned the public against  forces 
which  attempted  to fortify themselves through violence  and  to 
disrupt peace and social unity.

The   PMK  founder,  Dr.  S.  Ramadoss,  had  apprised  the   NDA 
constituents of the violence in some areas.

PMK seeks ban

In  a  related  development,  the Union  Minister  of  State  for 
Petroleum and PMK leader, Mr. E. Ponnuswamy, sought a ban on  the 
DPI,  which,  he said, had issued death threats to  him  and  Dr. 
Ramadoss.

He  would apprise the Chief Minister about the threats,  he  told 
reporters.

Producing  copies of what he described as the ``threat  letters'' 
addressed  to  a journal, Mr. Ponnuswamy alleged,  ``they  (Dalit 
Panthers) want to eliminate me by accusing me of working  against 
their interest.''

The Minister, however, replied in the negative when asked whether 
he had brought the matter to the notice of the police. He said he 
did not want to be provided additional security.

Meanwhile, the Dalit Panthers of India, while denying any role in 
the murder of the PMK activist, accused Dr. Ramadoss of trying to 
incite violence using the issue.

The DPI convenor, Mr. R. Thirumavalavan, told reporters that  the 
agitation  programmes  announced  by the  PMK  were  attempts  at 
instigating violence. The DPI would consult its allies, the  TMC, 
the  Puthiya Thamilagam, the RPI and the Janata Dal (secular)  on 
the  course of action to be adopted on the issue. Other  friendly 
parties,  such  as  the  AIADMK  and  the  Left,  would  also  be  
consulted, he added.

The  State  government had not taken action on the murder  of  14 
Dalits in the Cuddalore district in the last couple of years,  he 
claimed.

Referring to the PMK accusation that the DPI was responsible  for 
the  murder,  he wanted to know if the PMK was  willing  to  take 
responsibility for the murder of Dalits in Cuddalore.

Asked whether the DPI would contest the Nellikuppam  by-election, 
he  said, his stand was that the TMC alliance should contest  the 
seat.  The central committee of the DPI would meet on January  25 
to take a decision in this regard, he added.
