
Kerala ready for talks on dam: Nayanar 


By Our Staff Reporter

KARUR, JAN 21. 

The Kerala Chief Minister Mr. E.K. Nayanar, today disclosed  that 
he  has  asked  his  irrigation  Minister  to  write  to  the  TN 
Government inviting the Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, or  a 
Ministerial  delegation  to Tiruvananthapuram for  holding  talks 
over the issue of increasing the height of Mullai Periyar dam. 

Speaking to presspersons here today, Mr. Nayanar said that a team 
of engineers comprising representatives from both the States  had 
visited  the dam and had submitted its report. A  final  decision 
could  be  taken only after discussing the report either  at  the 
Chief Ministers or Ministerial level, he said when asked  whether 
the Kerala Government was flexible in resolving the issue.

There were many inter-State disputes over issues concerning  dams 
and  they  could be resolved through negotiations, he  noted.  He 
asserted  that  he  enjoyed  friendly  relations  with  the   Mr. 
Karunanidhi  and  hoped  that  the  issue  would  be  sorted  out 
amicably.

Referring to the forthcoming elections in Bihar, Haryana,  Orissa 
and  Manipur, Mr. Nayanar stated that the CPI (M) was  trying  to 
forge  a Third Front in Bihar to fight the BJP and  Congress  (I) 
led  fronts  in the State. The party leader Mr.  Harkishen  Singh 
Surjeet  has  already held preliminary discussion with  Mr.  Deve 
Gowda,  Mr.  Chandrashekar  and Mr. Laloo Prasad  Yadav  in  this 
regard. Defeating the communal forces was of foremost importance, 
he  said  when asked about the party's stand with regard  to  the 
allegations of corruption raised against Mr. Laloo Prasad  Yadav. 
The case against Mr. Yadav is before the court, he added.

Mr. Nayanar strongly condemned the Gujarat Government's  decision 
to allow Government employees to join the RSS terming it as anti-
Constitutional  and against democracy. The decision of the  State 
Government was a dangerous development, he said.

Criticising  the  Uttar Pradesh Government's  reported  directive 
stating  that  any religious group which wants to  construct  any 
place  of  worship  should obtain the  permission  of  the  State 
Government, he said that the greatest threat faced by the country 
was from communal forces. There has been no instance of  communal 
violence  during  the  past three and half years  in  Kerala,  he 
claimed in support of his argument.
