
A sunny side to policing 


MR.  RAJENDRAN,  TRAFFIC  constable on  his  beat  near  Valluvar 
Kottam,  prefers to stand outside the solar-powered booth set  up 
there and carry out his tasks. 

It  is not that he does not want to use it, and he is aware  that 
the booth is more than a shelter as it has certain amenities such 
as wireless mike, mini fan and public address system. 

Yet,  he  is not able to use them as remaining inside  the  booth 
during  day means a long incarceration in the  attractive-looking 
but stuffy box. 

Someone  who has been in the solar energy sector has now  plunged 
in the fray, aiming to address this problem with a solution  that 
is based on materials.

This company has come up with a different model of  solar-powered 
booths,  which, according to the firm, will provide the  kind  of 
conditions  that  will prompt the traffic policemen to  use  them 
effectively. 

The  company late last month approached the Police, Highways  and 
Chennai  Corporation for permission to install 40 such booths  at 
different places in Chennai. 

Convinced of the need for such improved shelters, the City Police 
has  given its consent to Solker Industries, which has  come  out 
with the booths. 

However, this is subject to certain conditions such as the colour 
of  the  booths  being cream or light yellow,  insurance  of  the 
structures against accidents or natural calamities. Besides,  the 
local  police  officers  should  be  consulted  at  the  time  of 
installation. 

Mr. K. E. Ragunaathan, Managing Director of the company, says the 
model  of the booths to be manufactured by his  organisation  and 
another company, Lloyd Insulations (India), are dismantlable  and 
can  be  shifted. It can be used as  telephone  booths,  security 
booths, telecom shelters and site offices. Besides, safety grills 
can be made available to prevent damage and it is fire proof.

The first such booth is going to be installed near the statue  of 
Mahatma  Gandhi  on  the Marina and the Chief  Minister,  Mr.  M. 
Karunanidhi,  has  been  approached to making  it  functional  on 
January  26, Mr. Ragunaathan says, adding that the  support  from 
the corporate sector will make not only this venture popular  but 
also  help  in creating greater awareness of the  application  of 
solar energy in day-to-day life.

Among the places where the police concurrence has been given  for  
installing the booths are the junctions of Sterling  Road-College 
Road,  Anna Salai-Spencer, Wallajah Road-Anna Salai, South  Usman 
Road-Anna   Salai,   V.   M.   Street-Radhakrishnan   Salai   and 
Radhakrishnan Salai-Natesan Salai. 

Solar powered booths have tremendous potential in and around  the 
city, where there are no power lines close by. 

These  include  highway  facilities such  as  toilets,  telephone 
booths and kiosks. 

What  is more, the concept is certain to become  attractive  when 
rural  areas  are  sought  to  be  networked  for  Internet   and 
Communication booths through big projects like that of WorldTel.

(By T. Ramakrishnan)
