
A rendezvous with luck


IT  WILL  be  a  get together with  a  difference,  bringing  the 
national  airline  and  the overseas carriers  operating  out  of 
Chennai airport closer. 

The  proceeds  that the gala event will generate, will go  for  a 
cause.

Putting its people and resources together is the Indian  Airlines 
Colony Welfare Association, the ``Carnival-2000'', the millennium 
get-  together, at its sports stadium in Meenambakkam on  January 
22 (Saturday). 

The focus of the fair is just plain ``fun and frolic''.

Fashion  show  and dance by ``John Britto's  ArtworX'',  a  dance 
programme by IA colony residents' group, drawing competition  for 
kids  in  the 6-7 age group, children below and above  12  years, 
quizzes for the younger generation are some of the events  billed 
for the day. 

Some  50  stalls of the various trade  industries  including  the 
airline,  and a light music programme by ``Vasantha  Geethangal'' 
are   on  the  agenda  for  the  occasion,  says   Mrs.   Lalitha 
Chandrasekhar,  the organising chairperson.The proceeds  of  this 
carnival will go a long way in improving the existing  facilities 
at  the  airlines  colony besides adding  new  amenities  at  the 
creche.

Mr.  P. K. Jayakumar, Convenor and Deputy Manager (Finance),  IA, 
said there would be no entrance fee but it would be optional  for 
the visitors to try their fortune with a `lucky draw' coupon  for 
Rs. 10 to win exciting prizes and free dining coupons provided by 
five star hotels. Mr. Chandrasekar, IA Regional Director (South), 
IA,  will  inaugurate the event. Cine actor  Vijay,  and  actress 
Jyothika   will  make  special  appearance  to  give   away   the 
complimentary overseas destination tickets for the winners of the 
luck draw contests.

The  major project to have a revamped creche, aims  at  upgrading 
the  existing one functioning in Meenambakkam. Some of the  civic 
problems  in  the  locality  will  also  be  addressed  with  the 
resources available.

(By T. S. Shankar).
