
Another attempt to beautify Chennai 


By P.Oppili

CHENNAI,  JAN. 21. Yet another afforestation programme is in  the 
offing  for  Chennai. But the difference this time  is  that  the 
planting  of saplings will be taken up not only in the city,  but 
in  the suburban areas also. The funds for the programme will  be 
provided by the Centre. 

According to Forest department sources, the Union Government  had 
recently  sanctioned Rs 4 crores for the afforestation  programme 
and the State Government has accepted to provide Rs 55 lakhs.

Already  an  afforestation  programme has been  launched  by  the 
Forest Department in the city and various districts in the State. 

The   funds  for  the  programme  were  provided  by   respective 
corporations and municipalities. 

The  new  programme  christened  `Green  Belt  for  Abatement  of 
Pollution  and  Environmental Improvement'  envisages  increasing 
green  cover not only in the city, but in the urban areas of  the 
city also, say the officials. 

The  existing tree plantation programme in the city ,  which  was 
originally planned for golden jubilee of Indian Independence, was 
launched two years well after the planned date following  delayed 
arrival of funds from Chennai Corporation.

A senior official said about 1.30 lakhs saplings will be  planted 
in the Greater Chennai area including the Town Panchayats,  under 
the new programme.

Districts  are also covered with Madurai and  Coimbatore  getting 
50,000  saplings,  Tirunelveli and Salem  35,000  saplings,  5000 
saplings  Tiruchi  and Erode besides Bhavani,  Kumarapalayam  and 
Pallipalayam getting 3000 each, say the officials.

Under  the  new project, the saplings raised  in  the  department 
nurseries   will  be  planted  by  the  Forest   department   and 
maintenance   will  be  given  to  NGOs  and   other   interested 
organisations, says a senior officer.

To  workout the modalities of planting the saplings in  the  city 
and its suburban areas, a meeting was convened by the  Government 
here  on  Thursday.  The  Forest  and  Environment  Secretary  Mr 
S.Rajarethinam, senior Forest department officials including  the 
Principal   Chief   Conservator  of  Forests   Mr   V.R.Chitrapu, 
representatives   from   the   Chennai   Corporation,    Highways 
department, NGOs with experience in planting of saplings such  as 
Exnora,  Rajasthan Youth Association, representatives from  Lions 
Clubs and a few other organisations participated in the meeting. 

Some  of the NGOs suggested that innovative techniques should  be 
adopted to raise the saplings and motivation campaigns have to be 
organised.  Another  point is the involvement  of  Public  Sector 
Undertakings. Mr M.B.Nirmal of the Exnora said saplings could  be 
planted during birthdays. Yet another suggestion was planting  of 
saplings after prayer. Preparing an environmental map of city  to 
identify suitable places for taking up planting saplings was also 
suggested at the meeting, officials said.
