
Pallava inscriptions found in temple 


By Our Special Correspondent

TIRUCHI, JAN. 21. Some very rare and interesting new inscriptions 
dating  back  to  Pallava, Pandya and early  Chola  periods  (8th 
Century A.D) have been found in the Thiru Nedunkalanathar temple, 
about  20  km  from here, on  the  Tiruchi-Thanjavur  highway  by 
scholars of Dr. M. Rajamanickanar Centre for Historical Research.

Dr. R. Kalaikkovan, Director of the Centre, said epigraphists had 
noted  about 30 inscriptions in the temple in the past,  but  the 
new  and significant inscriptions were found by the  scholars  of 
the  centre,  Dr. M. Nalini and Dr. R. Akila, during  the  recent 
renovation  of  the temple, when a large number of  stone  slabs, 
pillars  etc.  were cleaned up, and a few hidden  underneath  the 
ground were brought out.

The earliest of the new findings relate to Dandivarma, a  Pallava 
king of the 8th century, and has been engraved during his  second 
reignal  year, namely in 789 A.D. The inscription is on  a  stone 
slab  depicting a trisul and a pair of seated bulls  sculpted  on 
the top of the slab. 

The  inscriptions  relate to the gift of gold made  by  Marpidigu 
Viluperaraiyan  Chendan and Olochan, in memory of  their  friend, 
whose name, however, is not clear. 

The second inscription found on the back of the slab registered a 
gift of 13 kalanju of gold by several individuals and  goldsmiths 
for meeting the cost of burning a lamp in the temple.

Five  other  inscriptions have been found on  two  early  pillars 
which were utilised by the past renovators to form the ceiling of 
the roof of the cloister in the temple. Two of these inscriptions 
belong  to the period of Komaran Chadaiyan, a Pandya king of  the 
9th century.

The  11th reignal year inscription of the king (873  AD)  reveals 
the  reclamation of a piece of land at Melaikurichi, a  devadhana 
village of the temple, by a devotee named Kamaneri. The reclaimed 
land  was  named  as  Kotukulavar  Kani  by  the  authorities  of 
Nudunkulam  village. It was stipulated that all the  farmers  who 
cultivated  the reclaimed land should pay three measures of  rice 
(`naazhi')  every day to the temple, irrespective of the  quantum 
of yield they got from the temple.

The 13th reignal year inscription of Komaran Chadaiyan  registers 
the gift of two kalanju of gold to the temple by Chattan  Cherran 
of Enattankudi which was a part of Thevur Nadu. 

The  inscription  of Aditya chola registers the gift  of  Vadukan 
Vaduki  of  Periyantaikudi for burning a perpetual  lamp  in  the  
temple.

The meykirthi of Rajendra Chola is found engraved on one side  of 
a  pillar and on the other side of the pillar an  inscription  of 
Parantaka Chola 1 dated 926 A.D is found. 

The  inscription  refers  to the gift of 45  sheep  made  by  one 
Murugan  of Kulittandalai (presently known as Kulitalai)  towards 
the burning of a lamp in the temple. 

The  inscription also said that one Ulakan of Kattupalli  Niyamam 
accepted the gift of the sheep, and assured to burn a lamp  daily 
with one ulakku of ghee.An inscription found engraved on a  stone 
reveals  the  practice  of staging dance dramas  in  the  temple, 
during  Chitrai festival, and seven different dance  dramas  were 
staged. 

The  titles  of  two  of the  dance  dramas  were  Bhuvanasundari 
Kalyanam and Thirunedunkala Puranam, alias Vinaya Parakkramam. 

This  was  one of the very few inscriptions of the  Chola  period 
mentioning about staging of dance dramas in temples.

According  to  Dr. Kalaikkovan, a stone beam with  sculptures  of 
Yakshi and a Thirthankara was unearthed from the basement of  the 
Mandapa during the recent renovation of the temple. 

A  sculpture of a Thirthankara found on a granite pillar  at  the 
Nandi Mandapam along with a few inscriptions mentioning the  name 
Sri Mutt Purakkudippalli indicates the existence of a Jain palli, 
in the vicinity, of Nedunkalam during the Chola days.

Pallava inscriptions found in the Thiru Nedunkalanathar temple.
