
Court issues notice to Govt., SEC 


By Our Legal Correspondent

HYDERABAD, JAN. 21. Mr. Justice V.V.S.Rao of the AP High Court on 
Friday ordered that notices be issued to the State Government and 
the  State  Election Commission in a writ petition filed  by  the 
former MLA, Mr. Kodanda Reddy, seeking a direction to conduct the 
elections  to the Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad (MCH)  along 
with other municipalities and corporations in the State.

The  petitioner contended that for the last decade  officers  had 
been running the affairs of the MCH violating the  constitutional 
mandate regarding the local bodies and self-governance. He  cited 
a news report wherein it was stated that the Cabinet had  decided 
to postpone elections to the MCH in view of the operation of stay 
orders  of  the High Court. He averred that it was not  true.  He 
sought  a  direction to conduct the elections  along  with  other 
municipal  bodies.  Mr.  Justice  Rao  adjourned  the  matter  to 
February  1  and directed the registry to post the  present  writ 
petition  along  with  other similar  writ  petitions  wherein  a 
direction  to  conduct elections to the  nine  municipalities  in 
Ranga Reddy district was sought.

Nomination of candidate upheld

A Full Bench of the High Court, comprising the Chief Justice, Mr. 
M.  S.  Liberhan, Mr. Justice J.Chalameswar and  Mr.  Justice  R. 
Ramanujam,  upheld the constitutional validity of Section  52  of 
the  Representation of the People Act, 1951, which  provides  for 
nomination of a candidate by a recognised political party in  the 
place of the earlier candidate who died before polling but  after 
finalisation of nominations. 

The Bench was dismissing a writ petition challenging the mode  of 
conducting the election of the Sirpur Assembly constituency after 
the death of the TDP candidate.

Mr.  Purushottam  Rao,  the official candidate of  the  TDP,  was 
killed  by naxalites before the polling during the  last  general 
election. The Election Commission called upon the TDP to nominate 
its  candidate in the place of Mr. Purushottam Rao  and  declared 
that polling would be held.

Lions at circus prohibited

Mr.  Justice  V.V.S. Rao of the High Court  directed  the  Police 
Commissioner,  Visakhapatnam,  to  take steps  to  implement  the 
earlier  order of the court to see that lions were not  displayed 
in the Great Bombay Circus now being run at Visakhapatnam.

The  Judge  was  refusing to vacate the earlier  orders  in  this 
regard.  The  Visakha Society for the prevention  of  cruelty  to  
animals  filed the writ petition complaining that  officers  were 
not  taking  steps to see that lions and other animals  were  not 
displayed in circuses. 
