
HC asks Balaji Group chief to pay RBF Rs. 85 cr.


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI, JAN. 21. The High Court has asked the Special Officer of 
the  RBF  Nidhi Limited, Chennai, to present to  the  Court,  the 
actual balance owed to the company by the Chairman of the  Balaji 
corporate Group, Mr. Sreenivasulu Reddy.

The Court was dealing with an anticipatory bail application filed 
by Mr. Sreenivasulu Reddy, who is also a former MP from Ongole. 

It directed him to mobilise funds to pay Rs. 85 crores, which his 
senior counsel, Mr. K. Asokan, admitted as his liability  towards 
RBF.

Mr.  Reddy's application noted that he apprehended arrest by  the 
city Central Crime Branch police, pursuant to various  complaints 
given by the depositors against the RBF. 

Contesting  the  version in a bail application filed  by  another 
person named as accused in the RBF Nidhi case, Mr. Reddy said all 
the  loans obtained on behalf of the Balaji Group from  RBF  were 
secured.

It was contended on his behalf that the group had repaid over Rs. 
150  crores and the outstanding along with interest due was  only 
Rs. 85 crores. 

This  was  contested by the prosecution, which  stated  that  his 
outstanding to the RBF was over Rs. 200 crores.

Mr.  Justice  P.  D. Dinakaran noted that Mr.  Reddy's  side  had 
fairly  conceded  there was a balance payable by him to  the  RBF 
towards money borrowed through 42 employees working under him.

However, the Judge said he found a discrepancy as to the  quantum 
of balance of principal amount and interest. 

The  amount  could  not  be arrived at by  either  side,  as  the 
relevant  records  were claimed to be seized by  the  Income  Tax 
authorities.

Mr. A. R. Rao had been appointed as Special Officer of the  Nidhi 
company by the Company Law Board. 

The Judge said it would be suffice to direct the Special  Officer 
to work out the actual balance to be paid by Mr. Reddy on  behalf 
of  the 42 employees to whom the funds of RBF were said  to  have 
been  lent  with proper securities and report to the  court  with 
necessary details. 

Mr.  Reddy  was at liberty to place all the  necessary  materials  
before the Special Officer to work out the balance amount.

Mr.  Rao,  the Judge said, was at liberty to  interact  with  the 
Deputy  Director of Income Tax No. 1, Nungambakkam, Chennai,  who 
was  stated  to have seized the relevant records. The  DD  No.  1 
could  place  any  legal objection to  this  before  the  Special 
Officer  and inform the Court on the next hearing  date,  namely, 
January 25. However, the direction would not entitle either party 
to seek copies of the documents from the Income Tax authorities.

Asking  Mr. Reddy to mobilise the required funds for meeting  the 
admitted  liability,  Mr. Justice Dinakaran directed  him  to  be 
available  before  the Crime Branch Police for  interrogation  or 
investigation at the latter's office whenever the police required 
his presence. 

The police should not harass him and if he (Mr. Reddy) failed  to 
cooperate  with  the interrogation or investigation,  the  police 
were  at  liberty to arrest him, the Judge said  and  posted  the 
matter for January 25.
