
Ridiculous claims 


Sir,  -  Ms. Malini Parthasarathy's interview  with  Gen.  Pervez 
Musharraf (The Hindu,Jan. 17) was a glorification of the ruler of 
Pakistan.  Some of his statements are factually  incorrect:  that 
the  hijackers  of the IA plane are not in Pakistan,  that  `true 
democracy'  will one day return to Pakistan, that the people  are 
very  happy with the military rule and that the Kargil  intrusion 
took  place with the full knowledge of Mr. Nawaz Sharif,  deposed 
Prime Minister. 

His  claims sounded all the more ridiculous because  right  below 
the  report  on  page 1 of the interview was  the  news  about  a 
staffer  of the Indian High Commission in Islamabad being  beaten 
up. 

The  front  page  of  a newspaper is  primarily  for  news  which 
reflects  the  realistic situation, not a mirror of  the  castles 
built  in the air by a few people. As a long-time reader  of  The 
Hindu,I was very disappointed.

R. Ranganath,

Chennai

Sir,  -  The interview shows the mind of the General  on  various 
issues  and problems facing Pakistan. First of all,  Indians  are 
not  doubting  the legitimacy of his government.  Definitely  the 
army has a role not only in politics but also in  nation-building 
and  the structural stability of Pakistan. But India cannot  take 
Gen. Musharraf at face value in bilateral relationship.

Pakistan, under the prevailing conditions, accepting the military 
rule  is an experience, but to trust the ruler something more  is 
needed.

We  felt  that  the military rule caused  less  damage  than  the 
democratically-elected  governments  to  bilateral  relationship. 
Most  of  the wars were fought during the period of  the  elected 
governments  in  Islamabad. Probably, the question  of  supremacy 
between  the army and the head of government was the reason.  But 
both  the  military and the democratic governments are  not  free 
from the clutches of fundamentalists.

We  can  understand politicians dancing to  the  fundamentalists' 
tune, but why should the military do so?

The  General  ordering the arrest of the IA plane  hijackers  and 
turning  them over to India holds the key to  Indo-Pak  dialogue. 
India  is  sheltering  refugees from Bangladesh,  Sri  Lanka  and 
Myanmar  but it never allowed them to indulge in  terrorist  acts 
against those states. 

On   the   contrary,  Pakistan  is   intentionally   aiding   the 
fundamentalists  of  Kashmir just because they  are  Muslims.  If 
Pakistan closes its borders with Pakistan-occupied Kashmir,  then 
there will be no Kashmir issue.

A. S.Chakravarthy,

Chennai

Sir,  - Gen. Musharaff's blunt remark that Kashmir alone  is  the 
root  cause of all that happened between the two  countries  only 
shows  that  Pakistan will never be satisfied  until  it  annexes 
Kashmir.  But such a possibility is a daydream. He is evasive  on 
the  Lahore Declaration and dilly-dallies on permission  accorded 
to  the pilot of the hijacked IA plane for landing in  Lahore  or 
Kandahar. 

Also,  Gen. Musharraf's statement blaming the Indian  negotiating 
team  for  the  infructuous talks with the  hijackers  cannot  be 
accepted. 

The  crux of the interview is that Pakistan's new leader  is  not 
keen on arresting the deterioration in the relations between  the 
two countries.

Mani Natarajan,

Chennai
