
Restraint, key word in Lama episode 


By K. K. Katyal

NEW DELHI, JAN. 21. What stands out in the midst of all manner of 
public  controversies  stirred by the Lama episode  is  the  care 
taken  by  New Delhi - and Beijing - not to play  up  the  issues 
arising  out  of it. As a result, fears of a  derailment  of  the 
processes  to improve the ties between India and China have  been 
belied.  Not that the potential for damage was missing -  on  the 
country, a thoughtless comment, a stray remark casting doubts  on 
the  motives of one side or the other could have slowed down,  if 
not  reversed, the positive trends evident in bilateral  dealings 
of late. The restraint was clearly the result of conscious policy 
decisions  which took into account geopolitical realities in  the 
region and the current play of global forces. 

New Delhi's conduct now sharply contrasts with its attitude  over 
four  decades  ago, at the time of the Dalai Lama's  arrival  for 
stay here in exile. A New Delhi weekly has culled out a  telegram 
sent by Jawaharlal Nehru to the Dalai Lama: ``My colleagues and I 
welcome you and send you greetings on your safe arrival in India. 
We  shall  be happy to afford the necessary facilities  for  you, 
your  family  and  entourage  to reside  in  India.''  New  Delhi 
obviously proceeds on the premise - 2000 is not 1959.

`No comment' attitude

There has been no comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. Atal  Behari 
Vajpayee, or the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, or 
any  other senior in the Cabinet on the recent case - except  the 
Defence  Minister, Mr. George Fernandes, who on  second  thoughts 
corrected his remark, because of the risk of misinterpretation. 

In the last few months, New Delhi painstakingly undid the setback 
to the bilateral relationship caused by India's nuclear tests and 
China's reaction to it. The reversal, which at one stage appeared 
difficult,  was  brought  about  by at  least  two  major  public 
references  by the President, Mr. K. R.  Narayanan,  conciliatory 
remarks by the Prime Minister's Principal Secretary, Mr.  Brajesh 
Mishra,  and the pronouncements of Mr. Jaswant Singh, soon  after 
taking  charge  of  the  foreign office.  His  visit  to  Beijing 
culminated the process of reversal and marked the beginning of  a 
new  phase.  Though  China stuck to its  basic  stand  on  issues 
arising  from  the  Indian  tests,  Beijing's  public  stance  on 
relations  with India became highly positive. The two  sides  are 
now  working on the proposed visit by Mr. Narayanan to  China  in 
April,  to mark the 50th year of the establishment of  diplomatic 
relations. 

An essay in parrying

The   one-liners  with  which  the  External   Affairs   Ministry  
spokesperson fielded questions on various aspects of the  episode 
added  upto an essay in parrying. That, at a time when a  Niagara 
of  words  flowed from McLeod Ganj, near Dharamsala -  where  the 
young Lama found a temporary abode - of which the media in  India 
and  abroad  made liberal use. Every bit of what  the  groups  of 
Tibetans in exile, especially those close to the Dalai Lama, said 
was picked up.

A  day after the appearance of the young Lama,  the  spokesperson 
said  (on January 6): ``We are inquiring into  the  circumstances 
attended  on  the  sudden  arrival of the Lama  as  also  of  the 
consequences.''  This  tenor remained unchanged for  a  week.  On 
January  14, when the Chinese Ambassador, Mr. Zhou Gang, went  to 
the  External Affairs Ministry for a discussion on  the  subject, 
the spokesperson gave this information to the Press - India asked 
China  to furnish details about the monk's departure from  Tibet, 
the route taken by him and about other ``relevant'' points.

In  Beijing, the Chinese Foreign Ministry  spokesperson  repeated 
(on  January 11) the official explanation that the Lama had  left 
Tibet  to  collect symbolic ritual implements -  black  hats  and 
musical instruments belonging to the previous Karmapa Lama.  This 
was how China saw India's approach: ``The Indian side has said in 
explicit terms that Tibet is an inalienable part of China. It has 
also  stated  that the Dalai clique cannot  carry  out  political 
activities in India. We hope the Indian side can strictly  honour 
its  commitments  on  the relevant  question  so  that  bilateral 
relations can improve and develop.''

A  section  of  the media in the West  described  it  as  China's 
``veiled  threat  to  India''.  New Delhi  was  cautious  in  its 
response to queries on this point. But on the day of the  Chinese 
Ambassador's  call  in the foreign office, the  spokesperson  had 
this to say: ``India and China had noted with satisfaction that a 
sound  momentum had been imparted to their relationship  and  the 
process  of  further  improving  ties was  under  way  under  the 
framework of the Panchsheel doctrine.''

So  far New Delhi has not been able determine what  prompted  the 
young  Lama  to leave Tibet. Was it an escape?  Was  the  journey 
undertaken  with  a  set purpose - connected  with  the  Buddhist 
clergy  rivalries,  especially in relation to  the  famed  Rumtek 
monastery in Sikkim? Those belonging to the rival sect call it  a 
``political  ploy''. New Delhi has chosen to wait till the  facts 
are  known. Till then, the Lama remains in India. He may even  be 
allowed to stay on. But asylum is not on the cards.
