
Bad festival


THE  INTERNATIONAL  FILM Festival of India, which  ended  in  New 
Delhi  the other evening, did little justice to the fact that  it 
was the first such event of the millennium anywhere in the world. 
Listless and dreary, it failed to attract some of the best movies 
of  1999.  Stanley  Kubrick's ``Eyes Wide  Shut'',  Mike  Leigh's 
``Topsy-Turvy'',   Zhang   Yimou's  ``Not  One   Less'',   Mohsen 
Makhmalbaf's  ``Kish  Tales'' and Jane Campion's  ``Holy  Smoke'' 
were some of the unpardonable misses. Even the only foreign  star 
of   the  Festival,  Ms.  Bibi  Andersson   (whose   professional 
association  with the Swedish auteur, Mr. Ingmar Bergman, led  to 
some  great cinema), was livid at the way things were  goofed-up; 
the  Festival could not get the motion picture that was the  most 
recent  and  representative of her work, reportedly  because  the 
distributor, MGM, said no, not until the money due to us is  paid 
! This, incidentally, is not the first time that the Festival has 
been  accused  of such misdemeanour. There are other  charges  as 
well, of mishandling and damaging prints and so on.

Without getting into a debate over this issue, one can point  out 
that  the Festival has failed to attain a certain  stature,  even 
respect, in the international arena. The reasons are well  known. 
The  Directorate  of Film Festivals, which organises  the  annual 
event,  has  not  been  able to shake  its  image  of  a  typical 
government  body,  replete  with mulishness  and  red-tapism.  It 
seemed  such  a  pity  that a former  Director  of  the  National 
Archives  at Pune - whose work in the field is renowned - had  to 
knock  on  several doors for a card, entitling him to  watch  the 
closing  ceremony. Worse, the Directorate has made little  effort 
to  stay in touch with audiences, and cinema is not  poetry  that 
one  writes  and revels in in the privacy of one's  chamber.  The 
moving  medium needs viewers if it is to live on. Obviously,  the 
Directorate  finds  itself  in a situation where it  is  easy  to 
fumble  and fall. It appeared nothing short of sacrilege to  call 
Mr.   Soumitra   Chatterjee  -  the  doyen  of   Satyajit   Ray's 
masterpieces  -  a Bengali actor. Mr. Chatterjee is  revered  all 
over  the world; his merit certainly transcends the  confines  of 
his native State. 

The  scenario  is  disturbing all right  without  the  Government 
planning  to  move  the Festival to another city  next  year;  at 
least, there are indications to this. Much has been written about 
the  folly of not having a permanent address, and when  the  main 
venue in the country's capital, Siri Fort, was recently  revamped 
at a huge cost to the taxpayer, one hoped that the Festival would 
finally  discard  its gypsy cloak. No festival  can  burn  bright 
unless  it commands excellent theatres and a dedicated team.  The 
Indian Festival cannot be ignorant of this; the Director  herself 
visits European and North American destinations every year, where 
such cinematic events are conducted with not just precision,  but 
with a sense of purpose and feeling. The Indian Festival, despite 
some  kind  of  focus on Asia, appears lost,  all  the  more  so, 
because  the  Government was foolish enough to do away  with  the 
market this year. Art cannot survive without commerce, and it  is 
time that an effort was made to buy some of the better movies  of 
the  Festival  and  show them around. People want  this,  as  the 
packed  halls  at  the Delhi Festival proved  beyond  doubt.  The 
National  Film Development Corporation was originally  envisioned 
to  promote  good cinema. That it has been unable to  do  so  was 
clear  when one saw some of its unflattering productions  at  the 
Panorama,  an  important  section of the Festival.  There  is  no 
denying that the malaise has set in deep, and it would need great 
determination  and  will  if the Indian  Film  Festival  were  to 
sparkle.
