
Reservation in the private sector 


By Gail Omvedt

WITH  QUOTAS declared for Jats in Rajasthan and with  controversy 
about   some  recent  Supreme  Court  decisions,  the  issue   of 
reservation  has again come to the forefront.  Probably,  though, 
nothing  is  as controversial as the whole  question  of  private 
sector reservation. Here, on the one hand many Dalit leaders have 
been  led to oppose ``liberalisation and privatisation''  in  the 
belief that the public sector is their main road to economic  and 
political  empowerment.  And, on the other, those  who  recognise 
change  as  inevitable are now demanding,  as  Maharashtra's  RPI 
leader  and  MP,  Mr. Ramdas Athavale, recently did  at  a  large 
rally, ``reservation in the private sector''. The issue, however, 
is not a simple one.

There  are,  in fact, four rather different ways  that  oppressed 
communities - such as blacks (African-Americans) in the U.S.  and 
Dalits  in India - have organised against the  exploitation  they 
have  endured  for  centuries. One is  as  political  communities 
demanding  ``compensatory  discrimination'' programmes  from  the 
State which in this respect is taken as representing the  ``whole 
people''.   (Reservation   in   India,   ``affirmative   action'' 
programmes  in the U.S. and special subsidies and grants in  both 
countries are the important examples). The second is as political 
communities,  mobilising  to  achieve  political  power  directly 
through the force of their votes and the alliances they are  able 
to  make. (The BSP in India and the large number of  black  large 
city  mayors in the U.S. provide noteworthy examples). The  third 
is  as  cultural communities seeking to confront and  change  the 
internalised ``cultural'' characteristics that result from  their 
centuries of oppression but hamper their movement forward in  the 
present.  (The  best example here was the ``million  man  march'' 
organised  some years ago in Washington D.C. by the black  Muslim 
leader,  Mr.  Louis Farakhan, which was aimed  at  restoring  the 
dignity and the family and community position of black men).  And 
the  fourth  is  as economic  communities  exerting  pressure  on 
companies or institutions, both to employ more of their community 
and to produce the kind of products suitable to their needs.

The  question of ``reservation in the private sector'' has to  do 
not only with the first method - pressure on Central  Governments 
-  but also with the fourth method - direct economic pressure  on 
corporations and institutions. This has to be understood in order 
for  the whole issue to be seriously debated. While some  believe 
that ``reservation in the private sector is impossible'', this is 
simply wrong. Most ``affirmative action'' programmes in the  U.S. 
in  fact  work in the private sector. One basic  reason  is  that 
there  is no simplified division between public and private.  Any 
sector that is regulated and/ or funded by the Government is open 
to  Government  directives.  In  the U.S.,  to  take  a  specific 
example,  colleges and universities are all by  Indian  standards  
``private''  since  they  are  not  directly  controlled  by  the 
Government;  they raise their own budgets, charge  student  fees, 
make their own decisions, appoint their own teachers, and so  on. 
Yet,  because  they get some Government aid and  are  subject  to 
Government  regulation,  ``affirmative  action''  programmes  can 
operate:  if they do not fulfil the criteria, the Government  aid 
will be withdrawn.

This, however, takes place in a much more flexible and less rigid 
situation than in India. There would be no question, for example, 
of automatic promotion for holders of reserved posts in the  U.S. 
- there are no specific posts earmarked for minorities, and there 
is no such thing as automatic promotion.

Instead,  ``affirmative action'' means that a certain  proportion 
of  black  (or other minority) people are supposed to  be  there. 
Since  people  who have grown up with the Indian system  find  it 
hard  to  believe  that  such a system  can  work,  it  might  be 
suggested  here that the American Government fund  some  specific 
studies by a combined Indian-American team of largely Dalits  and 
blacks,   to   genuinely  compare   reservation   systems.   What 
comparative work has been done so far has been either by American 
scholars or upper-caste Indian scholars.

The  second factor is that the growth of minority (in  this  case 
Dalit or black) representation in private sector institutions can 
be  compelled  not  simply by Government  action  but  by  direct 
economic  or  political pressure. Some examples  easily  come  to 
mind. Why does the U.S. Supreme Court now have black judges?  Not 
because it has ``reserved posts'' of any kind, but simply because 
the President has found it politically necessary or expedient  to 
appoint  at  least some minorities. This  is  political  pressure 
similar  to  that which produces Ministries in India  through  an 
informal  ``quota  system''  that has  to  accommodate  not  only 
representatives  of all political parties and of all  regions  or 
States, but also of different castes and communities!

Why is it that media in the U.S. has, in contrast to India today, 
so many black faces? The difference at this point seems, at least 
to me, to be dramatic. Today it is a black woman, Oprah  Winfrey, 
who is the highest earning TV personality, with $1 million a hour 
being her most recently reported rate. It is not simply a  matter 
of  a new ``stars'' either. There are many prime-time serials  in 
the  U.S.  which  focus on blacks or other  minorities,  or  even 
working  class  families (Indians may find this hard  to  believe 
because  those  serials shown here are normally  the  upper-class 
ones  such as Dynasty and Santa Barbara; but neither has been  as 
long-lasting  in  the  U.S. itself as the Bill  Cosby  show).  In 
contrast, serials especially on Hindi channels almost  invariably 
focus  on  upper class families living  in  double-storey  houses 
which  hardly one per cent of the Indian population  can  afford, 
not  to mention the light-skinned stars. In the U.S.  newscasters 
(formerly called ``anchormen'') now include women and  minorities 
in  a way dramatically different from 10 to 20 years earlier;  in 
India while women are quite decently represented, both women  and  
men are obviously overwhelming upper-caste.

What  is the reason for the difference? How has the  black  media 
presence   increased  in  the  U.S.?  Not  through  demands   for 
``reserved  posts'' for stars of talk shows or  newscasters,  but 
largely  through  community-based economic pressure.  Blacks  and 
other  minorities now constitute not only a large  proportion  of 
the U.S. population, but minorities that have become conscious of 
their  economic needs. It is not only ``Buy American''  that  has 
been  a  slogan  in the U.S.; there have  also  been  decades  of 
promotion  of  what  is sometimes  called  ``black  capitalism.'' 
Blacks,  Chinese-Americans, Indian-Americans, Hispanic  Americans 
and others are by now quite conscious of their own rights, needs, 
and  specific culture. They will watch television shows to  which 
they  can  relate, and they will buy the products  advertised  on 
those shows. They will also tend to buy from companies which they 
know employ their own people, and produce products that they  see 
as relevant to them.

So  far little of this has happened in India. Dalits are  not  an 
insignificant  minority,  and  while  poor,  with  an  increasing 
employed  section that has some economic clout - which  would  be 
even  more if they were united and conscious. With Bahujans  they 
constitute  a majority. Yet this majority still seems willing  to 
accept  upper caste standards, including light skins,  and  upper 
caste  dominance on the media. Or have the Indian  companies  and 
media producers as yet simply not found a way to tap this market?

In  any case, Dalit leaders such as Mr. Ramdas Athavale would  do 
well  to consider how community pressures can be built up to  act 
upon  the  private  sector, and not simply  make  rhetorical  and 
politically ineffective demands for reservation. And  conversely, 
those who feel that the whole reservation system is ``lumpenising 
government''  or fear that it may ``tear India's  polity  apart'' 
should direct their energies towards reforming the system, rather 
than simply denying just demands. Because, whatever way it comes, 
the  demand for empowerment of previously  suppressed  majorities 
will not be halted.
