
Contested terrain 


By C. Rammanohar Reddy

IN  A  disparate number of areas, all the  tussles  and  tensions 
inherent in the reform process have been in evidence in the  past 
fortnight.  In Uttar Pradesh, the strike action by the unions  of 
the  State  Electricity  Board has demonstrated  once  again  the 
pitfalls  of  a  unilateral  reform programme.  That  even  in  a 
liberalised  environment, corporate firms would not  hesitate  to 
make  protectionist demands has been shown by the  lobbying  that 
the  domestic automobile industry has begun against the  imminent 
import of new and second-hand cars. And how easily the Government 
can  slip  back into wanting to hold on to its  powers  has  been 
illustrated by the proposed ordinance on telecom regulation. None 
of these processes have played themselves out fully. But each has 
brought  out into the open many of the elements of the  political 
economy of reform.

The  UPSEB  case is only one more event that threatens  to  bring 
reform in the infrastructure sector to a halt. Be it in power  or 
telecom  or roads, close to a decade after the first attempts  at 
opening up infrastructure to private participation there are  few 
tangible  results  to be seen - other than in  a  few  scandalous 
projects  like the Enron power plant. In the power sector,  there 
is  a tendency to blame red tape in the States  or  ``misguided'' 
opposition   by  environmentalists  or  the  politically   strong 
agricultural  lobby (that enjoys free electricity) for  the  slow 
additions  to generating capacity from private entrepreneurs  and 
the  limited  overhauling of the State  Electricity  Boards.  But 
rarely have attempts been made to involve in the  decision-making 
process  all the groups who will be affected by  a  restructuring 
programme  -  so  as to base reform on as  wide  a  consensus  as 
possible.

While  the  100,000-strong staff of the UPSEB who are  on  strike 
have  been made out to be the villains of the piece, the  way  in 
which the tussle has developed suggests otherwise. The  immediate 
background  to  the  decision to break up the  UPSEB  into  three 
different  entities  is the discussions that have been  going  on 
between the State Government and the World Bank for a  structural 
adjustment  loan.  But  the proposal has been in the  air  for  a 
couple  of years. The State Government though has chosen  not  to 
seriously engage the staff in discussions about the  trifurcation 
of  the UPSEB. An agreement last year by the State Government  to 
study  the  fall-out of similar reorganisations in  other  States 
(Andhra  Pradesh,  Haryana  and Orissa) was  never  followed  up. 
Instead,  on  the  very day that the staff went  on  strike,  the 
Government  rammed through its trifurcation of the UPSEB.  Is  it 
any wonder then that the unions have been adamant?

There  is  no certainty that even if the UPSEB  unions  had  been 
fully  involved  in the decision-making process they  would  have  
agreed  to the break-up. (There is no certainty either  that  the 
standard  prescription  of  splitting up the  SEBs  will  make  a 
difference.  It  may  be too early to pass  a  judgment  but  the 
experience  of  A.P.,  Haryana and Orissa does  not  suggest  any 
noticeable  improvement.) Yet, in a democracy an ad-hoc  approach 
of  the kind witnessed in U.P. will not deliver lasting  results. 
There  are many who advise the Government to stand  ``firm''  and 
call for a Thatcherite approach to unions. But such a strategy is 
doomed  to  failure  when the  scale  of  transformation  planned 
exceeds  all that Mrs. Thatcher managed. The instances of  labour 
action  that  are  now taking place in  different  parts  of  the 
country  may  well  mark  the  end  of  an  extended  period   of 
``industrial  peace''  in the country. Not all the  protests  are 
defensible. (The most outrageous demand - ultimately successful - 
was  surely that of the unions of the transport  corporations  in 
Tamil  Nadu  that their driving licences should  not  be  revoked 
after accidents that result in deaths.)

A very different kind of pressure is being brought to bear on the 
Government  by  automotive  manufacturers.  In  a  most   unusual 
alliance  between Indian and foreign firms, which has broken  the 
barriers  between the Bombay Club and the  others,  manufacturers 
that  have  benefited from the liberalised policy  on  automotive 
manufacture  have  begun  lobbying against  the  removal  of  the 
quantitative  restrictions (QRs) on import of new and  used  cars 
and two-wheelers a year from now.

Global  automotive  firms which found it  attractive  because  of 
``tariff  jumping''  to set up shop within the  country  are  now 
leading the chorus of protests against a lowering of tariffs  and 
the  lifting of QRs. They are in fact calling for the  imposition 
of  certain kinds of non-tariff controls on the import  of  cars. 
Evidently, a regime of uniformly low import duties that in theory 
should  benefit  the  consumer  is  not  to  the  liking  of  the 
automotive  industry. There may be a strong case to  protect  the 
considerable  investments - old and new - that have been made  in 
the  industry. Yet, much like the power engineers who are  trying 
to protect themselves against a complete overhaul of the  system, 
the automotive industry too is raising the barricades against the 
natural  course of liberalisation. Even more unusual is the  fact 
that while the removal of the QRs could hurt agriculture and  the 
small-scale industry more than the car industry, it is the latter 
which  has been able to attract the most attention. It  has  been 
left to a lone chamber of commerce to observe that the automotive 
industry  should be treated no differently from the rest  of  the 
Indian  economy  which has been forced to adapt to  the  gale  of 
import competition during the Nineties. The Government,  however, 
has  explicitly  signalled  that it is very  sympathetic  to  the 
concerns of the automotive industry.

Yet,  in recent weeks the most selective approach to  reform  has 
been  the one followed by the Government in its overhaul  of  the 
TRAI.  Although  the details of the proposed  ordinance  are  not 
clear,  what  began  as  an attempt to  clarify  the  powers  and 
responsibility of TRAI is threatening to degenerate into a  farce  
as  the  Government  shows signs of stripping  the  regulator  of 
authority  and  keeping  all powers in matters  of  both  policy-
formulation and the setting of rules to itself.

A  cornerstone  of competition in the infrastructure  sector  was 
supposed   to   be  the  presence   of   independent   regulatory 
authorities.  But  ever since it was established  TRAI  has  been 
embroiled in a running battle with the former monopoly  providers 
of  telecom  services  - DTS and MTNL -  and  the  administrative 
Ministry,  the DoT. One can quite legitimately argue  that  there 
was  insufficient preparation and inadequate discussion prior  to 
the  creation  of the TRAI. Since the TRAI was the first  of  its 
kind  in  India,  the inexperience with  such  regulatory  bodies 
showed  in much of its tussle with the DTS and the MTNL. But  the 
new  legislation that the Government has decided on  will  remove 
all  semblance of independent regulation. The removal of  dispute 
settlement powers from the TRAI and the creation of an  appellate 
tribunal  to  hear  these  matters is  only  one  aspect  of  the 
restructuring.  The big sham is that the TRAI is no longer  going 
to  be an independent regulatory body - it will be reduced to  an 
advisory  role on a number of important matters. That means  that 
the  Government  will  continue to have a final  say  in  telecom 
regulation,  which in effect means that it will be the  DoT  that 
will have the last word.

The   rationale  that  will  subsequently  be  offered  for   the 
emasculation  of the TRAI will surely be that in a  poor  country 
where  the telephone density is so low, the Government must  have 
the  final say in the formulation of rules and regulations.  Yet, 
this is only an ex-post rationalisation that is meant to  protect 
the position of the DoT which after TRAI started setting  tariffs 
suddenly  discovered  its social obligations of an  expansion  of 
telecom services.

Despite  all  talk  of a consensus on reforms we  have  here  one 
instance of the Central Government wanting to retain powers  that 
will maintain the dominant position of Government undertakings in 
one  sector  (telecom) even as one State Government  attempts  to 
break  what it sees as vested interests that come in the  way  of 
greater  competition  in another infrastructure  area  (power  in 
U.P.). At the same time the Central Government is quite open to a 
sympathetic  consideration of the demands for protection  from  a 
powerful   lobby  of  domestic  and  foreign  companies  in   the 
automotive industry. The playing field is not being levelled. The 
reform  process  is  only strengthening the  hands  of  the  more 
powerful sections of the economy.
