
'Separatism will not work in Sri Lanka' 


By Prasad Kariyawasam

The  current  political and security situation in Sri  Lanka  has 
been a subject of focus by many analysts and writers in TheHindu. 
In  keeping  with the highest journalistic standards,  most  such 
contributions have been unbiased and factual. However, the  op-ed 
feature of January 21 by the former Foreign Secretary, Mr. A.  P. 
Venkateswaran,   entitled  ``Civil  War  in  Sri  Lanka''  is   a 
conspicuous  departure  from  the  tradition  of  balanced  views 
expressed  by  others who contribute regularly to  TheHindu.  His 
article   contained  inaccurate  facts,  selective   quotes   and 
misrepresentations,   making   his  contribution  appear   as   a 
justification for separatism in Sri Lanka. The following comments 
are a response to some of his tendentious remarks.

It  has been widely accepted by many political analysts that  the 
drop in the percentage of votes in the victory for the President, 
Ms.  Chandrika  Kumaratunga,  was  primarily  due  to  the  anti-
incumbency  factor  and due to the tactics used by  the  LTTE  to 
ensure her defeat. Yet she gained more votes than the  Opposition 
leader  in the all-important Tamil area, Jaffna district.  In  an 
editorial  comment following her victory, TheHindu stated,  ``yet 
even  if a number of Tamils may not have voted for the  President 
in her re-election bid, she remains their best bet to usher in an 
era  of  peace  offering as she has, the  first  non-  chauvinist 
dispensation in Sri Lanka.''

The  commitment  shown by the President  following  her  previous 
massive electoral victory in 1995 to find a political solution to 
the  ethnic issue is well known. She not only sent emissaries  to 
Jaffna  to  talk  to  the leaders of  the  LTTE,  but  the  group 
comprised  trusted  and  committed personalities  close  to  her, 
manifesting  the  President's earnestness to  reach  a  political 
settlement.  This hand of friendship was repudiated by  the  LTTE 
leaders  who  simply  refused to talk  on  substantive  political 
issues.  Despite pleas to focus on issues of relevance, the  LTTE 
harped  on  tactical  issues  like  withdrawal  of  troops,  etc. 
Finally,  the  talks collapsed when the LTTE sank  several  Naval 
ships  in  a  surprise  attack  in  violation  of  the  ceasefire 
agreement,  and  not  allowing  the Government  to  talk  on  the 
devolution of power proposals with the LTTE.

Justifying  the current grievances of Tamils on the basis of  the 
1972  Republic  Constitution is not only anachronistic  but  also 
down  right  absurd. This Constitution has been replaced  by  the 
1978  Constitution  for  which there are no less  than  16  other 
amendments primarily introduced to placate the grievances of  the 
Tamils.  Among those amendments, provisions were made to  declare 
Tamil  and Sinhala as the languages of administration  throughout 
Sri  Lanka. Moreover, several provisions were also introduced  to 
guarantee the fundamental rights of citizens of Sri Lanka without  
prejudice to their ethnicity or religion.

Since  the  advent of Buddhism in Sri Lanka at the time  of  King 
Ashoka in India, the Sri Lankan state had traditionally  provided 
a  protective umbrella to this religion. However, this  provision 
has  never been at the expense of other religions in the  island. 
It was only to safeguard to the practitioners of Buddhism perhaps 
from  the forces of religious coercion that was sweeping  through 
the  sub-continent  from  time to time against the  will  of  the 
people. Perhaps this may be the reason why Buddhism survived only 
in Sri Lanka in the sub-continent since its birth in India  2,500 
years  ago. In this context, provisions were reintroduced in  the 
1972  Constitution  and were retained in 1978 which  state  that, 
``it  was  the duty of the state to foster  Buddha  Sasana  while 
assuring to all religions, the rights granted by Articles 10  and 
14.  It must be emphasised that Buddhism is not a state  religion 
under  the Constitution. In fact no religious group in Sri  Lanka 
has  complained  against  such provisions  in  the  Constitution, 
manifesting that they enjoy all the privileges and facilities  to 
practice  and foster their religions without any hindrance.  Only 
those who promote separatism are ostentatiously aggrieved by this 
provision on religion in the Constitution. 

The population by ethnic composition in Sri Lanka is  ``Sinhalese 
- 74 per cent, Sri Lankan Tamils - 12 per cent, Indian Tamils - 6 
per cent, Muslims - 7 per cent and Others - 1 per cent.'' It  may 
be  noted that 6 per cent of the so-called ``Indian Tamils''  are 
of  recent  Indian origin and live predominantly in  the  central 
province of Sri Lanka among Sinhalese. They and their leaders who 
have  been  Cabinet  Ministers in  the  Government,  have  always 
disassociated  themselves from violence and the separatist  Tamil 
lobby. Most of their demands have been won primarily as a  result 
of  peaceful agitation by their leaders, in particular  the  late 
Mr. S. Thondaman, the eminent Tamil leader born in India and  who 
became a well- known national figure in Sri Lanka.

Many  Tamil separatists in the past and present continue  to  use 
Cleghorn's  Minute  of 1799 as a justification  to  a  two-nation 
theory  in  Sri Lanka. However, it is well known  that  Mr.  Hugh 
Cleghorn lived in Sri Lanka only for a brief period before  being 
interdicted  from his official duties on charges  of  corruption. 
Governor  North,  the  first Governor of the  Colony  of  Ceylong 
indeed  dismissed  the work of Cleghorn in the  following  terms: 
``the  greatest part of what he (Cleghorn) wrote after  the  coup 
d'oeil which he took of the country during the few days he was in 
it  in '96 (1796) was absurd.'' In fact, if one is to go  by  the 
interpretations  given  by some Colonial  administrators  on  the 
situation in our region, it would lead to greater irony.

For instance a statement of another of Cleghorn's contemporaries, 
Robert  Percival, said that: ``Besides the native  Ceylonese  who 
live  under the dominion of the Europeans, and are  distinguished 
by  the name of Cinglese (sic), the coasts are chiefly  inhabited 
by  Dutch,  Portuguese and Malays... When  the  Portuguese  first 
arrived in the island, the whole of it, with the exception of the  
woods  inhabited by the wild Bedas (Veddas) was possessed by  one 
race.''  Interestingly, no mention of the Tamil ethnic  group  at 
all, which is equally absurd as Cleghorn's minute.

In  the post-Independence era, most Tamil parties had used  Tamil 
nationalism  as  a  vehicle to capture votes  in  the  elections. 
Perhaps  this  was a reaction and a response to  such  tendencies 
prevalent  among some Sinhala politicians. However, in  order  to 
justify the cause of Tamil nationalism, some Tamil politicians of 
yore  and  militants at present in fact invent history  and  make 
many   a  myth  to  embellish  their  campaigns.  It   would   be 
unfortunate, if such myths and fabrications are to be believed as 
facts and reality. What the TULF stated in its election manifesto 
in  1977 is now history. In fact the very same TULF leaders  like 
Messrs  Amrithalingam, Yogeswaran and several others in the  past 
and  the  first Tamil Lady Mayor of Jaffna and  many  other  TULF 
leaders  like Dr. Tiruchelvam had been brutally murdered by  LTTE 
rebels.  The  issue  in Sri Lanka at  present  essentially  is  a 
struggle with separatism which applies means of the most  violent 
kind. It would be the best for the people of India to support the 
people  of  Sri  Lanka to build a  democratic,  multi-ethnic  and 
multi-cultural  nation which will contribute towards  the  social 
emanicipation  and  economic progress of the sub-continent  as  a 
whole.  Separatism  will  not work  in  our  region.  Responsible 
citizens of India should not be swayed by their ethnic loyalty or 
personal  prejudices  in viewing the situation in Sri  Lanka  but 
should merely go by facts, figures and actual history.

(The  writer  is  Deputy  High  Commissioner,  Sri  Lankan   High 
Commission, New Delhi).
