
Uncalled for 


IT  IS UNFORTUNATE that the country must witness  a  simultaneous 
strike  in all the 11 major ports and in the power sector in  the 
largest State, Uttar Pradesh. The U.P. electricity strike has had 
a spill-over effect on the States fed by the northern grid.  Just 
at  a  time  when  both the Government  and  the  private  sector 
confirmed  that  the  economy  was  recovering  fully  from   the 
downturn,  these  strikes come as a major setback. It  hurts  not 
just  productivity, but results in a series of disruptions  -  of 
production,  imports  and exports, earnings for  the  unorganised 
sector and indeed normal day-to-day life in several ways. If  the 
port  strike was uncalled for when conciliation proceedings  were 
in  progress  in Mumbai and the unions called  for  a  unilateral 
strike,  the crisis in U.P. could have been averted by the  State 
Government through proper negotiations. Coming on the heels of  a 
one-day  strike by officers of the oil companies, these  protests 
cost  the  Government  and the country very  dear.  Thousands  of 
crores  are  lost every day of the strike and at the  end  of  it 
neither  the  employees nor their political masters pay  for  the 
losses and it is the economy which suffers.

The  only  saving grace is that talks are still on  both  on  the 
ports  front  as  well as with the U.P. power  staff.  The  Union 
Surface  Transport  Ministry has taken the position that  it  was 
`illegal'  for  the  unions to go  on  strike  when  conciliation 
proceedings were on. It has rejected the demands for pay revision 
every  five years (instead of ten) and for some  allowances  with 
retrospective  effect, as it would trigger similar  demands  from 
employees in other Public Sector Undertakings. In the case of the 
U.P. State Electricity Board, the staff have opposed the proposal 
to  trifurcate the agency to deal in a corporatised  set-up  with 
generation,  transmission and distribution. Some unions want  the 
Government  to  shelve the idea, while others have  asked  for  a 
postponement of six months in its implementation. The question is 
why  are the staff opposing trifurcation or  corporatisation?  If 
the Government can guarantee there will be no retrenchment,  what 
more can they ask for? Obviously, they fear that  corporatisation 
may  be one step closer to privatisation. If U.P.  remains  firm, 
this  strike will fizzle out soon. The stage has been set  for  a 
major  restructuring  exercise  in the  infrastructure  sector  - 
power, telecom, ports, airports and highways to name a few. It is 
a question of time before other States follow suit.

Strikes like these drive home two points - the need for reviewing 
labour  legislation  to suit the times and the  inevitability  of 
corporatisation  or privatisation. The Government has never  been 
the best employer and has often set bad precedents for others  to 
follow.  The  political  pressures  on  both  Central  and  State 
Governments become so intense during these strikes that they  are 
not  able to take the right decisions. The Prime Minister  cannot 
be  expected  to intervene to resolve such deadlocks.  While  the 
unions have every right to press for their legitimate rights  and  
demands, they must not be encouraged to hold the economy and  the 
consumers to ransom. Reports from Calcutta that the dock  workers 
will  stop all loading operations to Port Blair and throttle  the 
supply  of  all essential items to the Union Territory  smack  of 
economic terrorism. On the power front, the State Governments are 
to blame for bankrupting the State Electricity Boards. An element 
of cross-subsidy in power supply may be inevitable, but that must 
be  confined  to  the really deserving and the  poor  and  it  is 
unacceptable to persist with free power to any sector. Similarly, 
the  corruption and collusion in the theft of power and the  line 
losses  need  to be exposed. Instead of striking only  for  their 
wages,   labour   unions  must  cooperate   in   stemming   these 
malpractices and expose those behind the crimes.
