
Overhaul taxation system - DCA 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN.  21. The Department of Company Affairs  (DCA)  has 
suggested to the Finance Ministry that the system of taxation  be 
recast in the context of the increasing cross-border mobility  of 
capital  to  evade  taxes and lower realisation  due  to  various 
concessions.

Disclosing  this  here today, Mr T. S. Krishna  Murthy,  outgoing 
Secretary to the DCA and Election Commissioner-designate, said it 
would  be worth while adopting, on a trial basis, the  system  of 
'direct anonymous taxation' adopted by Austria and flat rates  of 
taxes as in Ethiopia.

Inaugurating  a conference of corporate executives on  ``emerging 
challenges  before the corporate sector'', organised by the  All-
India  Tax  Payers'  Association, Chennai  Chapter,  Mr.  Krishna 
Murthy  questioned whether there was a need for a complex  system 
of  tax  administration and filing of returns  when  the  average 
effective  tax paid was only 15 to 20 per cent and  when  capital 
was able to move from country to country to avoid taxes.

Under  the  anonymous  direct  tax  system,  the  focus  was   on 
collection  of  a fixed rate of tax on income  generated,  be  it 
salaries  or interest, without reference to who paid  the  taxes. 
This  would work largely in the form of tax deduction at  source. 
The current dividend tax in India was one form of such taxation. 

He  said  it  was  unfortunate  that  the  Chelliah   Committee's 
suggestion for a mandatory statement of assets and liabilities to 
be filed by assessees was not adopted. Such a system would  avoid 
the need for filing of returns in 90 per cent of the cases.

Mr.  Krishna Murthy felt that if the domestic system of  taxation 
was  not  harmonised with the external  environment,  this  might 
prove ``disastrous''.

Mr.  A. C. Muthiah, Senior Vice-President, FICCI, in his  address 
read in absentia, suggested reintroduction of full tax  exemption 
on dividends received from a foreign company so that  investments 
made globally were treated on a par with domestic investments. He 
also   called  for  lowering  of  interest  rates  on   corporate 
borrowings  and anti-dumping duties to protect Indian  industries 
from unfair competition. Mr. Ashok Kumbhat, President,  AITPA-TN, 
called for reform of labour laws. 
