
Silent Force picks the plum 


HYDERABAD

BY SHEER brilliance of his hat-trick of wins, the first horse  of 
his  age group to perform this, Silent Force, a Doaba  Stud  bred 
colt, who won the Darley Arabian Stakes has become the top ranked 
3-year-old in station. Trainer Leo D'Silva who saddled this  colt 
is  stepping up the pressure for the trainer's championship  when 
he  won  the other two cup events to complete a cup  treble,  the 
others  being Sporting and Fog Cutter. The first two  horses  are 
owned by Mr. S. Rangarajan.

The  combination of Rangarajan/D'Silva/Appu had already  won  the 
Byerly Turk Stakes with Cosmic Rays. They have now won two of the 
four  Grand  Slam races for the youngsters. Silent  Force  had  a 
fitter  look than last time. There was a definite sheen  of  good 
health that emanated from his frame. Another one to catch the eye 
was the Bangalore import Alphabetic from SK Habib Khan's  stable, 
a  strong  well built colt who had his first  race  in  Bangalore 
without  success.  Quick away from the gates, Silent  Force  took 
command  to lead. This easy actioned son of Twist and Turn was  a 
cut above the rest. The feeling that Appu had in the saddle  made 
him  even look over his shoulders twice in the straight  when  he 
pressed the accelerator, eventually easing out to win confidently 
in a smart time of 1.13 1/5 sec. This timing was nearly identical 
to the time set by Fog Cutter in a Cat I race. Silent Force would 
perhaps  be rested till the Million race in February.  Alphabetic 
was steadily working his way through the inner rails finishing up 
second.  He  must have gained fitness from his  previous  run  at 
Bangalore  and  should be able to land the prize in  one  of  the 
maiden events when he goes back.

One  can't write off a good horse especially in the upper  crest. 
Even  this  writer  had the feeling that Sporting  had  lost  her 
sharpness  with  age  but how wrong she proved  to  many  of  the 
knowledgeable  racegoers.  There is no doubt that  she  has  been 
carrying  weights that were telling on her aging back but in  her 
last  run  she did lead till about 300 m from the  post.  In  the 
Qutab  Shahi  Cup,  a terms race over 1600 m,  Sporting  had  the 
biggest  advantage. From 60.5 kgs which she carried in  her  last 
two  races, she was down to 51.5 kgs in this race. Of course  all 
the  others  had  similar  drop  according  to  the  terms,   but 
apparently the mare owned by Mr. Rangarajan had made up her  mind 
that this was the chance of a lifetime before she meanders in the 
sublime surroundings of paddock and green grass as companions. 

The  owners of Blitz Craig must have pressurised  Mr.  Rangarajan 
for  the  services of Appu, who rode this colt in  his  last  two 
outings,  which  he won. The ride on Sporting  fell  to  Ravinder 
Singh  who rode a copy book pillar to post race. With 9  kgs  off 
her back, Sporting shuffled along quietly and kept her 6 year old 
legs  flashing to emerge a comfortable winner over  Blitz  Craig,  
who  learnt a lesson that the older horses with weight  advantage 
cannot be taken lightly and they are to be respected. This  Netto 
colt  could  never  get  up to the winner and  failed  by  1  1/2 
lengths.  SK  Habib  Khan who had brought  his  second  runner  - 
Astronautics for this event was edged out by Blitz Craig for  the 
second place by a neck.

In  the  third  race, D'Silva was hopeful that one  of  his  five 
runners  will  do  it.  So, it was with  Precedent  who  was  the 
favourite.

This mare no doubt has done wonders by moving to Cat I but  finds 
the  present  set up hard to handle. She has  reached  her  upper 
limits  which this race proved as she was unable to get  her  act 
together.  Next in betting Golden Hawk who tracked  Grey  Thistle 
made his run a bit soon which Ravinder Singh realised by the time 
he  had  reached the post as his mount just failed to  give  that 
extra  -  Fog  Cutter having only the  second  run  this  meeting 
responded  to  Moses  who  carried 1  kg  overweight,  from  hazy 
surroundings  to  catch up with the leader and win  by  a  narrow 
margin.

At  least  the twice fancied Fandy Design who let  her  followers 
down by running second twice built up courage to say that it  was 
time  she repaid the loses. Second favourite today to  the  Imdad 
Jah  owned Bold Attempt, the grey with Amyn Merchant took up  the 
cudgel,  showing  that she does not lack the fighting  spirit  to 
freely  gallop ahead with tail swishing whenever Merchant  picked 
up  the stick, winning by over five lengths. Bold  Attempt  could 
not  have beaten the winner but Warren Singh just after  entering 
the  straight was tightened in his path by two horses who  veered 
into  his line. The check took its toll and he could  not  really 
recover. Fandy Design is by Kristal Rock/Kind of Magic.

Like his win on Sporting, Ravinder Singh used the same tactics of 
gates to the post riding on Stylish Boy who was one of the  three 
favourites  to  win. The Gold Discovery gelding gave  trainer  Sk 
Kassam  the  sixth winner of the season. Ravinder Singh  was  the 
only  other  pro to score a double. The chances of  Olympic  Gold 
pushing  the  winner  to his limits was lost  as  Ritesh  in  his 
anxiety  floundered when this colt darted outwards  and  finished 
close  to the outer rails. Watch out for Gold Label who  promises 
to  be  in the thick of things by his reasonably good  effort  to 
step into third spot from a rear position till the bend.

Punters  took  a  gamble in following Dormancy in  a  1800m  race 
especially when this 6-year-old is coming back into racing  after 
a  longish break. The chance that was taken was  nearly  rewarded 
but  not  quite tuned to perfection. It was a brave  effort  from 
Dormancy who was racing at the wrong end of the field but started 
moving up gradually.

The lead taken by the 6 to 1 Disc Drive was far too much to cover 
as  Samad  induced his mount to an easy win.  Under  the  strain, 
Dormancy  was  wayward in the closing stages that  indicated  his  
basic need of a race gallop. Queen Exoria one of the lesser known 
horses in station could be fishing in right waters, the 6-  year-
old ran up into the last berth on offer and may be attempting  to 
do better next time.

Everything  pointed  in  favour of Hunnala Bru who  ran  a  close 
second in open company in his last race. The condition of today's 
race was restricted to horses who have not won during the winter. 
This  of course made matters so much easier for Hunnala  Bru  who 
easily polished off his opponents in this 16 horse field by  over 
two lengths. Both Hungama and Moment of Power who have been  near 
abouts last time, finished behind the winner.

It is unfortunate that trainer KV Srinivas had to run into a dope 
test that came positive on his runner Lovee, which means that  he 
is on a short holiday, affecting his chances in the chase for the 
championship in which he was a serious contender. This will  give 
D'Silva a definite edge to go further. But things are not so rosy 
for trainer T. Srinagesh and jockey P. Kumar. Their licences have 
been  taken  away by the Stewards and should they apply  for  the 
same they would not be granted till October 31, 2000.

ARIEN
