
Indians squander it yet again 


India  squandered  a golden chance to gain its first win  in  the 
Carlton and United series on Friday. It allowed Pakistan to wrest 
the initiative. 

Tendulkar and Ganguly gave a brilliant start for India. They  put 
on  about  100  runs at a fairly brisk rate.  This  is  the  best 
opening  stand the Indian has had so far, but the batsmen  failed 
to make good of this splendid start. 

Only  Tendulkar,  Ganguly and Dravid have shown the  calibre  and 
class required to perform on the international scene and  against 
quality  bowling.  But unfortunately, Dravid is going  through  a 
lean  patch  and  does not look confident. The  others  have  not 
impressed. One gets the felling that none of them can really come 
to terms with top quality bowling at the highest level.

The  way  the  Indians batted after the  exit  of  Tendulkar  and 
Ganguly  was a lesson for all aspiring cricketers on how  not  to 
play  cricket!  All that the Indians had to do  after  that  good 
start was to play sensibly and try to stretch the match till  the 
last  over  as the pressure was on the  Pakistani  bowlers.  Then 
India could have made it. But I was surprised to see the  batsmen 
playing  without  imagination and I wonder where we  are  heading 
for.  This squad depends too much on Tendulkar and  Ganguly,  and 
that's  unfair. Incidentally, Tendulkar and Ganguly  also  bowled 
the  last  two  overs  in this match. If these  two  have  to  do 
everything then it reflects badly on the state of the team.

India was on top even while bowling as the team once again picked 
early  wickets,  leaving Pakistan at 160-odd for  five.  But  the 
opposition  was let off the hook as Razzaq and the  tail-  enders 
plundered 90 odd runs from the last 10 overs. If the Indians were 
able to restrict the Pakistani total to 225, then not only  would 
the  Indian batsmen have enjoyed the psychological advantage  but 
the Pakistanis would have come under pressure.

The  thinking process on these aspects is vital, and goes a  long 
way  in winning matches. Whether in batting, bowling or  studying 
the opposition's strengths and weaknesses, it is clear that India 
has  not done proper planning. To be fair, I must also  say  that 
sometimes  even  the best laid out plan comes apart  due  to  the 
uncertainties associated with the game. 

If  there  is  a game-plan for every match  and  if  it  misfires 
everytime,  then there is something fundamentally wrong with  the 
planning itself. Razzaq played a superb knock and plundered  runs 
at  will. I have been watching him from the 1999 World  Cup,  and 
there  is no doubt he is a good all-rounder who can perform  when 
the  chips  are  down.  Razzaq played  a  similar  knock  against 
Australia  in the earlier game, and can also bat at No. 3,  which 
gives  the Pakistan team a lot of flexibility. India badly  needs  
such  an all-rounder and people concerned have to think in  terms 
of   developing  some  talented  youngsters  with   a   long-term 
perspective.

What I appreciate about Australia and Pakistan is they never give 
up,  and  show the ability to fight their way  back  after  being 
pushed to the brink. 

This  Indian team has repeatedly let the opposition of  its  hook 
after  moving  into  a position of strength.  It  is  becoming  a 
regular  feature now. The Indians are yet to learn to finish  off 
the  opposition, and this is the most important issue facing  the 
team management today.

BY K. SRIKKANTH
