
Machine Gun Kelly triumphs 


BANGALORE

THOUGH MACHINE Gun Kelly was the centre-piece of last week's one-
day racing, intense public interest revolved around Desert Lord.

Obviously  Machine Gun Kelly's nowhere in the 2,000  Guineas  had 
been  passed up in preference to his proven mettle in  handicaps. 
Well  weighed  when taking on a seasoned  bunch  of  campaigners, 
Eshwer's  ward  proved a notch too good for Azilian who  is  fast 
catching up with lost form.

Paul  Eddery  positioned himself so well for the  ``shoot''  from 
this chance ride that the fate of the race had been well  defined 
a  long way from home. Azilian made the finish a jot more  lively 
in holding off Mr. Confident who ran true to his present form. 

While  Kelly  garnered  utmost support, a portion  of  money  was 
plumped  on  Scenic  Star who had also  gone  unnoticed  in  that 
Guineas  run.  From the word go, Scenic Star found himself  at  a 
distinct  disadvantage  since he could barely eke  out  from  the 
solid  early  pace a free running berth of his choice  up  front. 
Having been forced to work for it, the gelding was a spent force.

For  two  reasons, Desert Lord went to the post as an  object  of 
curiosity.  The Placerville-Divine Light gelding had been a  late 
starter, the early part of his adolescence having been taken away 
in  moulding him to good racing shape. When the gelding, who  has 
had  several  preparatory mock races, made a  sensational  racing 
debut, he was almost instantly pencilled as a bright prospect. So 
when  Eshwer's charge took on a small but by no means weak  field 
over  a  challenging distance of 2,000 metres, the  eyes  of  the 
world for good reason turned on him.

There  was this nagging fear that the penalty had been too  stiff 
and  the elevation in class too demanding. Very few  horses  have 
defied  such a huge ``ask'' in recent memory and it was  thus  no 
surprise  Desert  Lord failed. Yet the effort should go  down  as 
encouraging solely because Desert Lord is still far from smoothly 
conversant  in  the art of racing. It would be wiser to  allow  a 
margin for Desert Lord's relative inexperience. 

Summer  Mood made a start to finish affair of it in the hands  of 
apprentice  Koch,  who has good reason to remember this  day  for 
posterity. Koch emerged with a lucrative double, the highpoint of 
which  was the two distinct styles he was to display. If  he  was 
sensible enough in alternating Summer Mood's pace to get the best 
out  of  Byramji's trainee, he was equally resilient  in  finding 
that ray of winning light on Sinister Minister quite literally at 
the end of a tunnel. 

Any  one who had a chance to spot Sinister Minister at  the  home  
turn  would have laughed off the five year old gelding's  chances 
in  the race as a ``joke''. In parts though, Arjun  Mangalorkar's 
ward was blessed with a stroke of fortune. Firstly there was this 
inviting  gap along the rails, Sinister Minister managed to  get. 
Secondly, two of the prime fancies were frothing failures.

The  sight of Richard Hughes going for the whip long  before  the 
heads  turned  for  home must have  given  followers  of  Premier 
Princess a jolt or two. Then there was this alarming drift out of 
a straight course by Lion of Judah. Curiously enough London Bells 
tried to adopt a kind of front running tactics he has never  been 
seen  doing. But the most significant help for Sinister  Minister 
came  in  the form of that slight shift away from  the  rails  by 
London Bells at crunch time. 

It was this piece of generosity which eventually helped  Sinister 
Minister, though it must be said to his credit that he was easily 
the  fastest  moving at the time even as London Bells  was  being 
weighed down by the effort of making all the running. If this win 
is  an indication that Sinister Minister has successfully  fought 
back  into racing realism from several past niggles, then  it  is 
hard to ignore his claim once more.

Of the two juvenile races billed for the afternoon, Kimono's  win 
in  the  opener was lot more impressive than Whitehall's  in  the 
upper division.

In  his lean and fit looks, Kimono would have gone well  with  an 
expert  eye  but Ponnappa's charge was certainly  not  among  the 
first three preferences when it came to the punting section which 
follows  the direction of money. Access All Areas had  a  greater 
measure  of  support,  needless  to  say,  the  filly's  breeding 
commanded as much respect as her solid morning work. 

It seemed a question of time when the big-built Access All  Areas 
raised  one good gallop to come within sniffing distance  of  the 
free  running  Kimono. That is when the crowd at large  took  the 
favourite's  win for granted only to ruefully switch over to  the 
sight of Kimono gamely kicking clear.

With  a run to help him along, Whitehall's win turned out  to  be 
less  dramatic despite the fact that Carnival Craze at one  stage 
was threatening to make a race of it. The most notable effort was 
Clyde  Barrow's.  The Steinbeck gelding's second had  a  pleasing 
tone about it.

Regal Wind brought about a whiff of refreshing change for trainer 
Lokanath  Gowda. Rakesh's decision to make his own  running  pace 
was  surprising in nature given Regal Wind's general  liking  for 
lying  off  the  pace.  Yet it was  a  rewarding  one.  For  long 
Decorated  Hero shadowed Regal Wind before letting Placid Ark  do 
the hard chasing.

If Stella Blue's last run was a guide, the five-year-old mare had 
as good a chance as any. Hanumant Singh lost no time in  grabbing  
the  early  initiative on the Taraporvala trainee.  It  was  this 
advantage which neutralised Something Fishy's determined bid. 

The  price drift on King's Common may have diluted  his  chances, 
leaving  this inescapable feeling that he is lot better than  his 
performance here indicates.Ruzzan rode a forceful finish to steer 
Andretti  to  a  comfortable  win in a race  which  by  its  very 
composition presented a look normally minefields present. 

As  if to drive home the point, friendless Omnipresence  threw  a 
scare  till the time Ruzzan managed to free himself  on  Andretti 
and  let the grey gelding have its say. Naked eye  perhaps  would 
have plumped for Omnipresence in his fight against Power Extreme. 

Very  few  would have bargained for a dead heat. When  the  judge 
announced  one,  there  was this understandable  humdrum  in  the 
stands.

H. S. MANJUNATH
