
A saga of determination and confidence 


IT  IS more like scaling Mount Everest. The thrill of  conquering 
the highest peak is something to be experienced. And it does  not 
stop  with  the  maiden  success. Similar  was  the  feeling  for 
Subramanian  Raman, the top Tamil Nadu table tennis  player,  who 
touched  the  summit  again,  by  winning  his  second   National 
championship  title. He represents the PSCB in the  national  but 
not since the days of V. Chandrasekhar, thrice national champion, 
has  a  talent from Tamil Nadu dominated the  national  scene  as 
Raman has done.

Raman's  story  has been of determination  and  self  confidence. 
Nothing  portrays  his character better than the way he  rose  to 
success  in Lucknow. The left hander, whose lethal forehand  made 
him  one  of the most difficult players to face at  the  national 
level  since  Manjit Dua, Raman's second national title  after  a 
lapse of seven years has a special significance. It was in Goa in 
1993  that he first became a National champion and  significantly 
since  then he has been in the final on each occasion but it  had 
always been a case of `so near yet so far'. The agony of the  man 
could  be imagined as also the ecstasy when in Lucknow this  time 
Raman  gave a new thrust to his career, appropriately in the  new 
millennium,  with an outstanding win over a seemingly  unbeatable 
player, Chetan P. Baboor. Not in the last three years has  Baboor 
lost to an Indian, barring Raman at the Khar Gymkhana  tournament 
last  year. Both have been the best of friends,  colleagues  in 
Indian Oil but healthy rivals in the arena. 

Each  time Raman believed he had in him to upset  Baboor's  apple 
cart  he  was only to find himself checkmated.  ``I  have  always 
admired  Baboor's  adaptability, his ability to take  charge  and 
change  the course of the contest'', Raman said, pointing to  the 
way  he  snatched victory in the more recent SAF Games  final  in 
Kathmandu after being under pressure.

In Lucknow it was different. On one side was Baboor thirsting for 
his  fifth successive title, coming as he did from  Sweden  after 
scoring some spectacular victories over world ranked players  and 
on  the other was a rival keen to cap his seventh entry into  the 
final  with the title. The only difference was this  time,  Raman 
was  better  prepared. ``I had come to Lucknow a  little  worried 
after having twisted my ankle while warming up prior to the  Khar 
Gymkhana  tournament which was held just before this  National'', 
Raman  said in a chat withTheHindu.But on hindsight  that  proved 
fortuitous.  ``I  could get an additional day's rest  in  Lucknow 
after the team event and then I also could tune my backhand which 
I  thought  was my weak link'', Raman said  while  narrating  how 
Baboor  failed  to  open  up loopholes  in  his  (Raman's)  game. 
Earlier,  Raman  was frank that he would always go into  a  match 
against  Baboor with the thought that ``I am right there. I  need 
to grab a game first''. But soon all plans would go awry.

``This time I was determined. My form was also inspiring. We play 
each other so often that I could read his intentions. For once  I 
felt  that both of us were more or less on even plane and it  was 
just a question of putting my best effort'', Raman said and  that 
was what he did while closing all the doors on Baboor!

The second title at the age of 30 years only makes Raman  believe 
that the best phase of his career is just about coming. ``I  feel 
I have been improving each year''. That also means that he should 
peg  his  goals  a  little higher.  Like  Baboor,  he  has  begun 
realising  the futility of spending all his time in the  national 
circuit. ``The accent for me now is to become an all round player 
through tough competition'', he said while unravelling his  plans 
to  divide  his  time  from  later  this  year  between  domestic 
competitions  and Swedish league. ``I have always thought  Baboor 
did  the  right  thing  to go there when  he  was  in  his  early 
twenties. There is no better place for improvement. Not only  are 
the  conditions there conducive but even the rules are  not  very 
binding. They allow us to return whenever we have national duties 
to  perform'',  Raman said after having experienced  the  Swedish 
competition for some months last year.

Giving  himself another three to four years at the highest  level 
of  competition,  Raman  said  he had  to  think  beyond  winning 
national  titles and make a mark on the international scene.  The 
commonwealth  championship  is the next big competition  for  the 
Indians.  Married  to a TT player, B. Bhuvaneswari,  Raman  never 
faces  the  lack of inspiration at home but as  he  admitted  his 
biggest  source of strength has been his employers,  Indian  Oil. 
Promoted  as  a Manager recently after being  honoured  with  the 
coveted  Arjuna award, Raman was candid,``in the last  ten  years 
Indian Oil has given me everything, made me rise to the level  of 
a  Manager now''. Indeed he could not have regained the  national 
champion status at a more opportune time!

Known  as a studious student of the game, Raman felt  that  while 
Academies  could bring up talents, it was ultimately the  feeling 
of top class competitions that `made true players'. 

``You  can  learn from watching top competition'' he  said  while 
praising  the  way  Tamil  Nadu  Table  Tennis  Association   had 
organised  the  Asian junior championship. ``I watched a  lot  of 
action  and I presume many junior players did too'', he said.  In 
Raman's mind the best advice to aspiring young talents was ``they 
should  not just aim to be among the top but once there show  the 
ability  to  work  towards being the  best''.  Indeed  can  young 
talents  ask for a better example than Raman himself -  a  player 
who strove to be the best, persevered and achieved his goal!

S. R. SURYANARAYAN

Chennai
