
Kobi Ziv and Victor Bruthans in summit clash 


By Kalyan Ashok

BANGALORE, JAN. 21. Two unlikely contenders set up a title  clash 
in  the Wearhouse-ITF Futures tennis championship at the  Century 
Club courts here today. 

Kobi  Ziv of Israel and Viktor Bruthans square off for the  final 
on Saturday, may not be among the best of 32- man field, but  the 
two  had enough patience and perseverance to complement a  stroke 
of fortune here and there. Their day was made.

Ziv,  the 19-plus army recruit from Tel Aviv eliminated the  last 
of the seeds, the No. 4 Boris Borgula of Slovakia 7-5, 7-5 in the 
first semifinals and later, Viktor Bruthans played right into the 
sunset,  staging another great come back to down Denis  Golovanov 
of Russia at 6-7 (6-8), 7-6 (7-2), 6-4 in a marathon tie  lasting 
140 minutes.

The first encounter was easily the better of two contests.  Kobi, 
used  his  quick  reflexes to dominate the net  and  the  Israeli 
youngster packed solid punch in his returns. 

He  matched  the  big serving and hard hitting  Borgula  in  full 
measure.  What made the difference in the 100-minute  tie,  which 
saw both trade breaks, was Kobi's ability to come good at crucial 
moments.  He did that with some cheeky strokes, which  one  would 
avoid in normal course. 

Both  players struggled to hold serve in the first set,  dropping 
it at regular intervals, before Kobi leading 6-5, cracked Borgula 
in the 12th to take the set. 

Borgula  stepping  up the pace in the second set, struck  in  the 
first  game  and  took  a 2-0  lead,  before  Kobi  returned  the 
compliments in the fourth to tie at two games all. 

In the fifth, Kobi was forced deuce twice, before finally held it 
with  an ace. In the sixth, It was Borgula's turn to dominate  as 
he belted three superb volleys to take keep the serve (3-3).

The two traded two more breaks in the eighth game (Kobi) and  the 
ninth  (Borgula) which tied the set at 5 games all.  Kobi  seized 
the chance in the 12th game after holding the serve in the  11th, 
with  two great volleys, beating onrushing Borgula right  at  the 
net to take set and match at 7-5.

Denis Golovanov, who was the finalist at Hyderabad had nursed the 
hope of a maiden Futures crown. 

But he should blame his loss today only on his inconsistency.  He 
simply `choked' when he should gone for the ` kill'.  

After  taking the first set in nerve racking tie- breaker at  7-6 
(8-6),  The Russian was right on top, leading 5-3 in  the  second 
set.  But  serving for the match at 40-30 in the ninth  game,  he 
double faulted to send the game to deuce. 

Still  he  had  a second chance, forcing advantage  with  a  good 
return  but  he  floored  that too with  a  mishit  and  Bruthans 
hammered home a volley winner signaling his revival. 

Breaking  Golovanov  in the ninth, Bruthans, who was  warned  for 
code  violation after flinging the racket after he had  lost  the 
first set, was a picture of poise. 

He set about methodically salvaging the situation, though he  did 
make quite a few unforced errors but he showed the grit to  stick 
on and went on to take the set in a comfortable tie-break verdict 
7-6 (7-2).

Golovanov  squandered a 3-0 in the decider which again  saw  both 
being  pushed to the limits on their serves. But the  fast-tiring 
Golovanov, who was warned for verbal abuse, had his own share  of 
mistakes, including quite a few double faults. 

He  again  allowed Bruthans to get off the  hook.  The  Slovakian 
ended  the bitter and prolonged contest with a decisive break  in 
ninth game (5-4) and held his serve for a spot on the summit.

Indian pairs bow out 

In  the  doubles,  both the top-seeded Indian  pairs  made  their 
exits. Saurav Panja and Prahlad Srinath, the winner of the  first 
Futures, went down 4-6, 4-6 to the Israeli duo, Andy Ram and  Nir 
Welgreen. 

It  was a disoriented display from the Indians, who  left  gaping 
holes which the Israelis exploited to the hilt.

In the second match, the Kirtane cousins, who came up against the 
Pakistan's  Aisam  Quereshi and Miles Maclagan of  Great  Britain 
were disappointing in the first set, which they dropped 3-6. 

But they dished out a better fare in the second set to lead  4-2. 
But Aisam Quereshi, who was outstanding with his volleys,  turned 
the tide and the set culminated in a tie-break win for the  Pak=-
British combination at 7-6 (7-2).

The results (semifinals): 

Singles:  Viktor Bruthans (Svk) bt Denis Golovanov (Rus) 6-7  (6-
8), 7-6 (7-2), 6-4; Kobi Ziv (Isr) bt 4- Boris Borgula (Svk) 7-5, 
7-5.

Doubles:  Andy  Ram & Nir Welgreen (Isr) bt 1-Prahlad  Srinath  & 
Saurav  Panja  (Ind)  6-4,  6-4; Miles  Maclagan  (GBR)  &  Aisam  
Quereshi (Pak) bt 2-Nitin Kirtane & Sandeep Kirtane (Ind) 6-3, 7-
6 (7-2).
