
Lankan cricket on a sound wicket 


WATCHING THE rain pitter- patter during the Youth World Cup Group 
`B' encounter against India at Matara the other day, the  Holland 
team  manager  said it doesn't usually rain in Sri  Lanka  during 
this time of the year. He should know. Tony Opatha had lived  and 
played  for  Sri  Lanka before moving over  to  Holland  some  20 
summers ago.

Opatha,  a  nippy  medium  pacer  and  a  hard-hitting   batsman, 
represented Sri Lanka for 10 years before calling it quits at the 
age of 29, the reason he says being lack of motivation. It turned 
out  to  be just two seasons before the country  gained  official 
Test status in 1981.

He  played  in the 1975 and 1979 World Cups in England  and  took 
three  wickets  in Sri Lanka's famous victory over India  in  the 
league phase of the 1979 competition. 

The  victory went a long way in the country gaining Test  status. 
Opatha and Anura Tennekoon announced their retirement soon  after 
their return.

In  fact,  Opatha  was called for the Test  trial  prior  to  the 
country's  inaugural Test against England at home. ``I took  five 
wickets and an unbeaten 44 in that game, but was not selected  in 
the squad. 

The  reason  given was that I was old,'' said Opatha,  who  later 
moved to Holland and took up coaching as a profession. 

His  greatest regret, as is the case with the many talented  ones 
who  played alongst him and earlier, is not having been  able  to 
represent their country in an official Test match.

Opatha  went on the Rebel Tour of South Africa in 1981, which  he 
says  he  would never have accepted a second time.  ``I  must  be 
honest, the money offered was attractive. Moreover, I had nothing 
more  to look forward to in my career,'' said Opatha,  who  later 
played for five seasons in the Lancashire League and a season  in 
the Irish League apart from the Dutch League.

Opatha had also played five unofficial Tests against India and  a 
few M.J. Gopalan Trophy encounters against Tamil Nadu.

``I enjoyed my cricket thoroughly. There wasn't money in it then. 
It was the love for the game that kept us going,'' he said  while 
going down memory lane.

He  feels  the  love for the game is what  is  missing  from  the 
present-day  cricketers.  ``I'm  happy that  the  cricketers  are 
making  money,  but  it has had a negative  effect  in  terms  of 
players  approach  towards  the  game.  There  is  a  workmanlike  
approach towards it now which is not good.''

Opatha  spoke fondly about the players who made it  possible  for 
Sri  Lanka  to gain Test status. ``It was more of less  the  same 
bunch  which  played  through  the  mid-Sixties  till  the  late-
Seventies.   Men  like  Bandula  Warnapura,  Tennekoon,   Michael 
Tissera,  Ranjan  Madugalle,  Roy Dias,  Duleep  Mendis,  Anurana 
Singhe, David Hein and a lot more. 

When we took on visiting Test sides we never had a complex  about 
being unrecognised. We gave them all a hard time. We once  bowled 
the  West Indies for 111 here in 1979. We played the  game  hard. 
The  unity  and  the team spirit was very  high,  bonded  by  the 
friendship both on and off the field. I don't see it today.''

Opatha  says Sri Lankan cricket is on a very sound  footing  now. 
``We've had our ups and downs but are returning to winning  ways. 
We  beat Zimbabwe in Zimbabwe and Australia at home. It  is  very 
healthy.  Everything  is well-planned. There is  an  Academy  and 
coaching programmes for the young.''

Recollecting  his experiences in South Africa, Opatha said,  ``We 
were  treated like any other international side. We got  to  play 
against  top  players like Graeme Pollock,  Mike  Procter,  Eddie 
Barlow  and the like. The quality of cricket was very high.  They 
had thrashed every rebel team - the ones from the West Indies and 
England.  South Africa was starving for international cricket  at 
that point.''

But Opatha says he wouldn't have gone a second time.

Why?

``We knew apartheid existed in South Africa, but we did not  know 
what it was like. We were disturbed by the sights. But we had  to 
go  through it, for we had committed ourselves and had  lost  our 
jobs  back  home.  But we'd never have gone  a  second  time.  We 
apologise  for  having undertaken the Rebel  Tour.  It's  history 
now.''

SANJAY RAJAN

now in Colombo
