
Triumph of the spirit 


WITH HIS thin features, piercing eyes, long hair and that  trade-
mark beard, the tall, swashbuckling Jerome Golmard might one  day 
find himself in the midst of a French epic, playing the role of a 
lifetime.  It  is easy to picture him slicing through  the  enemy 
ranks  on the horseback in a death or glory battle, or  galloping 
into the sunset with his loved one, a la D'Artagnan.

But  right now, tennis is his priority, and movies can wait.  The 
26-year old Frenchman from Dijon, who captured quite a few hearts 
in  Chennai even as he won the Gold Flake Open, came across as  a 
refreshingly different personality.

Golmard,  who has his arms tattooed and beads strung  around  his 
neck,  is passionate about alternate rock bands, spends  quite  a 
bit  of  his  time playing video  games,  enjoys  travelling  and 
meeting  people, apart from being one of France's biggest  tennis 
hopes.Giving  him  support and encouragement during  the  arduous 
tour is girlfriend Cecile, with whom Golmard has a  long-standing 
relationship. The two were inseparables really in Chennai.

And,  as  the tournament progressed, the crowd at  the  wonderful 
tennis  stadium in Nungambakkam developed a soft corner  for  the 
friendly  Frenchman.  Chants of `Go Golmard Go,' egging  him  on, 
were  often  heard  during the summit clash.  He  was  a  popular 
winner.Golmard's  smiling face might mask it, but his career  has 
been  one big struggle, and in the Frenchman's successes  against 
rather daunting odds, one can see the triumph of the spirit.

``One  has to go through an injury to see what it is like. It  is 
very  difficult and frustrating. I want to win now, make  up  for 
lost  time. I am hungry,'' revealed the left-handed Golmard.  The 
Frenchman had reached a career high 22 when bursitis in his right 
knee  ruled  him out of the second half of '99. Earlier  too,  in 
'96, a stress fracture in left femus had threatened his career.

Indeed, 1999 was a glorious year for Golmard. He triumphed in the 
Dubai  Open, where in an incredible run, he ambushed Tim  Henman, 
Carlos Moya and Nicolas Kiefer, and then made the semi-finals  at 
both  Estoril  and Monte Carlo, a Super Nine  event,  during  the 
European clay court season.

Then came that agonising phase, but Golmard as he admits,  stayed 
positive and did not allow the negative thoughts to creep in. And 
in Chennai, he started the millennium on a winning note.

How  much  the  victory meant to Golmard could  be  seen  in  his 
reaction  after  prevailing over Germany's Markus Hantschk  in  a 
gripping  final. Golmard fell over on the court in sheer joy  and 
relief. It had only been the second ATP title of his career.

He had always been rated high. One remembers a conversation  with  
veteran French Davis Cup player Oliver Delaitre some years ago in 
Chennai  and  he  picked Golmard as one  of  the  most  promising 
Frenchmen  around. The general impression among the players  then 
was that `Golmard is dangerous.' Just the kind of player who  can 
be  a  nightmare  for the favourites. He has become  a  lot  more 
consistent these days.

Golmard,  whose  younger brother Yannick too plays  good  tennis, 
began  his  quest in '93 like most newcomers,  competing  in  the 
various  Satellites and Challengers. It was only in '95  that  he 
started   making   inroads,  winning  the  Medelin   and   Bogota 
Challengers  and  qualifying for the Tour event in  Estoril.  His 
first  `run'  in the Tour came soon, at  Indianapolis,  where  he 
defeated Jim Courier to reach the quarter-final.

Since  then he has made quiet progress, until '99, when he  moved 
from  the periphery to the centre-stage. Golmard has  been  lucky 
too that he had someone as accomplished as Eric Deblicker of  the 
French Tennis Federation as his coach.

As he admits, the Tour is not all glamour as some suggest.  True, 
one  gets to visit a lot of places, there is `big money' after  a 
certain  level,  but  there is also a lot of hard  work  and  the 
options are not easy. In other words, no short cuts to success.

He  has seen it all. When he first played in Chennai, in '97,  he 
had  to come in through the qualifying rounds and  the  Frenchman 
distinctly  remembers those days. In fact, Golmard has  a  liking 
for  the  city and has been fascinated by some  of  the  beaches. 
``The people are so nice and friendly here,'' he says. This time, 
he  did not have much time to move around, but loved  the  little 
ride on the elephant with Cecile.

The feature of Golmard's game is his wonderful left-handed serve, 
which  he considers his biggest weapon. His fine performances  on 
clay  reveal his ability to rally from baseline and he  has  this 
ability to volley well too. Given a choice he would like to  play 
all his matches on the rebound ace, his favourite surface.

He  has  two goals for the future - perform better in  the  Grand 
Slam events (he has never progressed beyond the third round)  and 
become  a permanent member of the French Davis Cup team. He  does 
have the ability to achieve both his aims.

Golmard, who first started playing by hitting against the wall at 
the back of his house in Dijon as a six-year old, has  definitely 
gone on to bigger, better things.

S. DINAKAR
