
Exposing the lack of depth 


The  truth  about  Indian cricket is that there  are  just  three 
international class batsmen and two bowlers. The rest make up the 
numbers  and the selectors have very little choice, writes  VIJAY 
LOKAPALLY.

THE  TRUTH has dawned in a cruel manner. Indian cricket is  in  a 
most tremulous state, and in need of a strong arm which can  save 
the standards from plummeting further. The voyage Down Under  has 
turned  sour  in  the face of some humiliating  defeats  and  the 
disaster  has  led  to some startling  discovery  of  the  actual 
strength of the team in international cricket.

Regardless  of what the Indian cricketers achieve  in  Australia, 
the  fact shall never be challenged that outside  their  country, 
they  are  a bunch of under-achievers. The lack of depth  in  all 
departments  is appalling and nothing signifies it more than  the 
exposure  of  Vijay  Bharadwaj,  Devang  Gandhi  and   Hrishikesh 
Kanitkar.

This is not to suggest that we did not pick the best team for the 
daunting tour of Australia. The selectors did a near-perfect  job 
and  if  they excluded proven men like  Mohammed  Azharuddin  and 
Nayan  Mongia  from the side, they had their reasons.  Of  course 
non-cricketing because it defies logic when someone says that the 
likes of Bharadwaj, Kanitkar, or Jacob Martin can be  replacement 
for someone like Azharuddin. The very thought can be repulsive.

The  selectors  did their best in picking Debasis  Mohanty.  Only 
they  did  not realise that the team management had  very  little 
thought for this humble Orissa seamer, who may not remember  when 
he last played a match for India. He has been reduced to a `nets' 
bowler  because the team management cannot accept the  fact  that 
Venkatesh Prasad is a spent force.

To bowl one good spell in ten matches is no big deal. And that is 
precisely what Prasad has been doing for quite some time now. His 
slower one has lost the venom because it is no different from the 
other  five deliveries he sends in an over. Mohanty suffering  in 
the shadows of Prasad has been one of the most sickening  aspects 
of our cricket in the recent past.

The  selectors again did their best in picking  Harbhajan  Singh. 
Only  the team management could not be convinced and as a  result 
he  is  a  shattered bowler now with no  confidence  in  his  own 
abilities. Towards the end of the tour, he was left wondering  if 
he really was a part of the team. The only quality off-spinner in 
the  country  stands devastated without even getting  one  decent 
spell in international cricket.

There may not be any replacement in the country for Harbhajan and 
this  must  be  a  disturbing  thought  for  the  great  Erapalli  
Prasanna,  who, however had no time to spare for the Punjab  lad. 
But  there are a few players waiting to share the new  ball  with 
Javagal Srinath, the distinguished strike bowler respected widely 
in the big league.

Bowlers like Mohanty, T. Kumaran, Amit Bhandari and Ashish  Nehra 
deserve a better treatment. None should judge them without giving 
them a fair trial. Kumaran was sacrificed despite a good  showing 
as was Nehra. It has been no different for Bhandari.

The selectors might find a place for these talented youngsters in 
the forthcoming assignments at home. Also deserving a look-in are 
Murali  Kartik,  the best left-arm spinner in  the  country,  and 
Virender  Sehwag, said to be the hardest hitter of the  ball.  He 
may be good just against the spinners but at least he is good.  A 
batsman   with  better  credentials  than  some  who  failed   in 
Australia.  Cricketers  like Sehwag need to be  groomed  and  the 
advantage  of  playing someone like Kartik is  assuring  that  he 
keeps   his  place  in  the  side  by  taking  wickets  and   not 
masquerading as an all- rounder.

It is not fair to term cricketers like Bharadwaj, Kanitkar,  Ajit 
Agarkar,  Sunil Joshi, etc as all-rounders. It is not that  their 
replacements  would  bring about any sensational  change  in  the 
image  of the team but there is no harm in trying out a  few  new 
faces  just for the sake of it. Some determined  youngster  might 
just want to prove a point.

None  can  dispute  the fact that the  main  reason  for  India's 
deterioration has been the lack of depth. When the choice narrows 
down to either Bharadwaj, Kanitkar or Martin, the cupboard indeed 
looks bare.

In  the absence of competition for places, the performances  have 
only  dipped. Those in the team know there are none to push  them 
and  in the process they develop a tendency to take their  places 
for  granted.  It is this attitude which needs to be  jolted  and 
only some tough measures can bring about the desired change.

It is a pity that the second line of aspirants is poor. Take  the 
opening  batsmen  in  contention. S. Ramesh  qualifies  on  sheer 
performance, a combination of guts and commitment, but the search 
ends with him. There is no point trying to convert a reluctant V. 
V.  S. Laxman. The option is limited unless the selectors  decide 
to fall back on Vikram Rathour or blood Wasim Jaffer. There could 
be  an argument in favour of S. S. Das of Orissa, J.P.  Yadav  of 
M.P.  and Nikhil Haldipur of Bengal. But none has capitalised  on 
the  opportunities provided at India `A' level. The  one  genuine 
opener, constantly overlooked, is Reetinder Sodhi but then he too 
does  not  inspire confidence at the international level.  To  be 
fair  to  Devang  Gandhi, he may not be  inferior  to  the  other 
openers  in competition. The middle order does not promise  much, 
what  with the choice being limited to Mohammed Kaif, Sehwag  and 
Sitanshu  Kotak.  Difficult to say if any of them  might  last  a 
season of demanding international cricket. There are no competent  
wicketkeepers  in  sight. A Reuben Paul here and a  Thilak  Naidu 
there  is not good news, while Manoj Mudgal of U.P. has not  been 
consistent. 

Pankaj Dharmani can be a good bet but he is out of reckoning  for 
reasons best known to the selectors. He has been keeping  wickets 
this  season quite efficiently and would not be a bad  choice  if 
the  selectors insist on keeping Mongia out and  stop  persisting 
with the experiment of Sameer Dighe and M. S. K. Prasad. The toss 
up could be between Paul or Dharmani.

The  fact  is that there are no  quality  cricketers  threatening 
majority  of  the  mediocre bunch  currently  in  Australia.  The 
absence  of  a talented second line is the greatest  setback  for 
those  wanting to improve India's cricketing  image.  Australia's 
success has been based on a strong back up where cricketers  like 
Darren Lehmann, Michael Slater and Justin Langer cannot even  get 
into the one-day 14. It will take more than a decade for India to 
achieve a similar status provided earnest steps are taken now.

The  truth  about  Indian cricket is that there  are  just  three 
international  class batsmen and two bowlers of the  same  grade. 
The  rest  make  up the numbers and the  selectors  have  limited 
choice in this regard.

There  are plenty of technical shortcomings which may  take  more 
than a season or two to arrest. Until we reach that stage, let us 
accept  that India is an average side which wins mainly when  the 
opposition performs below par. Expecting the Indian team to raise 
its  game to win has become a rare happening. This  sounds  harsh 
but is a cruel truth.
