
Jadeja finds himself in no man's land


By Our Sports Reporter

VADODARA,  JAN. 21. The presence of Mohammad Azharuddin and  Ajay 
Jadeja  had enhanced interest in this year's Deodhar Trophy,  but 
the  latter will, in all likelihood, not figure any more  in  the 
premier one-day tournament of the country. Jadeja, who had scored 
91  in  North  Zone's  29-run win over West  Zone  at  Rajkot  on 
Wednesday,  was not in the original team announced by  the  North 
Zone selectors, and had been played by manager Mr. Suresh  Luthra 
on National selector Madan Lal's advice.

However,  there  have  apparently  been  objections  from  a  few 
Northern states regarding Jadeja's participation. Jadeja did  not 
play  in  any Ranji Trophy match this season and  does  not  even 
figure in the registered list of players of any state.

Jadeja had been representing Haryana, but had made it clear  that 
he  would not play for the state again. His letter to  the  Board 
indicating  his  desire to play for Jammu and  Kashmir,  however, 
came well after the September 30 deadline. As things stand, he is 
neither  registered with Jammu and Kashmir, nor has he got a  `no 
objection' certificate from Haryana.

The  North  Zone  manager, Suresh Luthra was  on  tenterhooks  on 
Friday,  on  the eve of the match against East Zone at  the  IPCL 
Stadium.  Mr.  Luthra has received a fax message from  Mr.  Sunil 
Dev, convener of the North Zone selection committee,  questioning 
his decision to field Jadeja in the previous match.

Mr. Luthra, after his talk with Madan Lal, had presumed that  the 
developments  were in the know of everyone concerned. Now he  has 
been  told  that Harbhajan Singh should also be included  in  the 
team when the latter arrives.

``Madan  Lal told me that Ajay Jadeja was in the team and  should 
play all matches. I did not have any doubts and it was only after 
the match that I came to know that there was some problem,'' said 
Mr. Luthra.

Mr.  Sunil  Dev  has termed the act  ``gross  indiscipline.''  He 
questioned  the  authority of Madan Lal to pick a player  on  his 
own.North had done well to win a high-scoring match against West, 
but could definitely do without these controversies in the  midst 
of a tournament. 

The teams (from): 

North Zone: Vikram Rathour (captain), Ashu Dani, Pankaj Dharmani, 
Virender  Sehwag,  Mithun Manhas,  Vijay  Dahiya  (wicketkeeper), 
Dinesh  Mongia, Rajiv Nayyar, Jasbir Singh, Amit Bhandari,  Robin 
Singh,  Rahul  Sanghvi, Sarandeep Singh,  Surinder  Singh,  Rahul  
Panta.

East   Zone:   Utpal  Chatterjee  (captain),  Syed   Saba   Karim 
(wicketkeeper), Nikhil Haldipur, Shiv Sundar Das, Rohan Gavaskar, 
Lakshmi  Ratan  Shukla,  Pravanjan Mullick,  Sanjay  Raul,  Jabed 
Zaman, Rajiv Kumar, Zakaria Zufri, N. Ranjan.

Umpires:  Messrs  V.M.  Gupte  and  A.M.  Saheba.  Observer:  Mr. 
Mohammed Ghouse.
