
Sampras fights back from the brink to stay on course 


By Nirmal Shekar

MELBOURNE,  JAN. 21. There is an unmistakable touch of  poignancy 
to  the  drama,  something  that  goes  way  beyond  the  defined 
boundaries of sport, when a great sportsman is forced to  perform 
on a big stage at a time greatness has temporarily taken leave of 
him - when he is forced to labour like an ordinary mortal.

It's like asking a groggy Picasso to paint a subway wall in  full 
public  glare or forcing a Marlon Brando to act out a scene  from 
Godfather when he is least prepared for it.

A master painter or a great thespian will never need to do  that. 
When  brush strokes of genius aren't forthcoming, a  painter  can 
take  a  break in the privacy of his home. When he is  not  happy 
with a scene during shooting, an actor can do another `take'.

But, sport at its highest levels is a cruel business, in that  it 
doesn't give even its greatest of champions a second chance.  You 
live  or  die  with  what you have brought  to  the  stage  on  a 
particular day.

Pete  Sampras,  of  course, knows all about  this.  And,  at  the 
Australian Open on Friday, he wasn't really begging for a  second 
chance - the chance to live and fight another day - as he put  on 
his  hard  hat,  picked up the shovel and got down  to  the  blue 
collar business with an in-the-trenches resolve so characteristic 
of the great man.

On  a day when the Australian Open experienced typical  Wimbledon 
weather  -  skies like molten metal, intermittent showers  -  the 
Lord  and  monarch of the famous lawns in London SW 19  staged  a 
magnificent comeback on meagre resources to outlast Wayne  Black, 
a  qualifier  from  Zimbabwe ranked 151 in  the  world.  Sampras, 
seeded three, won the third round match 6-7 (7-9), 3-6, 6-3, 7-5, 
6-3 in two hours and 48 minutes indoors, with the roof closed  in 
the Rod Laver Arena.

In  the  dozen years that he's been playing, putting  on  show  a 
brand of tennis that few men, if any, in the history of the  game 
could  have  matched,  this writer has  seen  Sampras  grind  out 
victories on bad days. But never has one seen the great man  look 
as hopelessly out of touch as he did this afternoon.

Two  things  saved  the man who is seeking  to  become  the  most 
successful  Grand Slam champion of all time here this  fortnight. 
One  was Sampras's serve, which, on a day when his  groundstrokes 
flew  all over the place, like bits of glasses from  a  shattered 
windscreen of a car that's hit a wall at high speed, stood him in 
good stead as he hit 36 aces, many of them on crucial points. The 
other was the man's extraordinary strength of will. 

``I was struggling to find my rhythm throughout the whole  match. 
My  serve  saved me. I hung in there. You are not going  to  play 
well  every day. Today was my bad day,'' said Sampras, winner  of 
12 Grand Slam singles titles.

It was painful to watch the greatest aristocrat of modern  tennis 
labour like a plebeian. As balls ricocheted off the frame of  his 
racquet or flew wide, adamantly refusing to hit the sweet spot on 
it,  the pathos of those moments could have been matched only  by 
the experience of having watched a Sir Lawrence Olivier mixing up 
his  lines  on  stage or Yehudi Menuhin  producing  a  series  of 
jarring notes.

``It just wasn't there today. But I had to remember who I  was,'' 
said the great man, not so much in vain as matter-of-factly.

And  every one of us in the great arena, too, remembered  who  he 
was  as Sampras plotted his way back into the match, putting  the 
pieces back, one by one, patiently.

Wayne Black, brother of Byron Black, who won the Gold Flake  Open 
in  Chennai last year, played a very good match, to be sure.  But 
if  Sampras, who will again play the Zimbabwean in Davis  Cup  in 
Harare  in two weeks's time, had been close to 60 per  cent,  the 
journeyman qualifier would not have lasted more than three sets.

But,  then,  the two-time Australian champion might have  been  a 
touch  unlucky  too in the first set tiebreak. After  saving  two 
setpoints,  Sampras had one of his own. And, if the linesman  had 
made  the  call - which he didn't - on what looked  like  a  long 
second serve from Black, Sampras might have won the set.

But,  as it turned out, Black went on to wrap up the set  on  his 
fourth setpoint and then took advantage of the two double  faults 
sent  down  by Sampras in the fourth game of the  second  set  to 
break the American's serve.

In  the third game of the third set, things really  looked  bleak 
for  Sampras  as  he was twice tottering on the  very  brink.  He 
fought  off two breakpoints there and then saw a sliver  of  hope 
for the first time on breaking Black's serve.

Rushing to the net behind his returns, Sampras brought off a pair 
of lovely drop volleys in that game before serving out that  set. 
The sequence was pretty much the same when he broke to 6-5 in the 
fourth set.

But through all this, Sampras was still struggling to groove  his 
groundstrokes.  He staved off two breakpoints in the fourth  game 
of the decider and it was only after he broke to 4-3 did  Sampras 
even resemble the great champion that he is.

Sampras,  incidentally, has never lost a five set match  in  this 
championship.  Today's  success was his eighth  five-set  victory  
here,  the most famous of them all coming five years ago  against 
Jim Courier in the quarterfinals.

His  ailing  coach,  Tim Gullikson, had just flown  back  to  the 
United States for emergency treatment of cancer and when  Sampras 
lost  the first two sets of that match to Courier, a  voice  from 
the crowd urged him on, saying: ``Do it for Tim, Pete.''

Sampras broke down on hearing that, wept for everybody to see and 
then pulled himself together to post one of the greatest comeback 
victories of the 1990s.

This  afternoon,  for  Sampras, it  was  not  about  overwhelming 
emotions,  more about pulling on a floor level  worker's  uniform 
and  getting down to the business of tinkering and painting.  The 
emotions  were experienced in the stands, by the connoisseurs  of 
the  sport,  who couldn't bear to see the king in the role  of  a 
commoner.

Sampras  will  meet Slava Dosedel of the Czech  Republic  in  the 
fourth  round  and, possibly, Tim Henman  in  the  quarterfinals. 
Henman, seeded 11, got past Sebatien Grosjean of France 6-1, 6-4, 
4-6, 7-6(6) today.

But  the  much  anticipated  slug-fest  between  two  Melburnians 
fizzled out as Mark Philippoussis easily got past Andrew Ilie  6-
4, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1.

In women's play, all the marquee names involved in daytime action 
went  through to the fourth round. Anna Kournikova,  whose  stock 
has gone up in these parts over the last few days when she's been 
seen  in the company of Philippoussis, came back from a set  down 
to  beat  Kveta Krdlickova of the Czech Republic 2- 6,  6-3,  6-4 
while the former champion Mary Pierce of France raced past Miriam 
Oremans  of the Netherlands 6-2, 6-4. Also into the fourth  round 
is Jennifer Capriati who beat Yi Jing-Qian of China 6-4, 6-4.

lThe results (prefix denotes seeding):

Men's  singles  (third  round): Slava  Dosedel  (Cze)  bt  Franco 
Squillari  (Arg) 7-5, 6-2, 6-3; Chris Woodruff (U.S.) bt  Richard 
Fromberg  (Aus)  6-1, 6-4, 7-6 (8-6); 3- Pete Sampras  (U.S.)  bt 
Wayne  Black (Zim) 6-7 (9-11), 3-6, 6-3, 7- 5, 6-3; Hicham  Arazi 
(Mar)  bt Fernando Vicente (Esp) 6-3, 6-3, 6- 2;  Nicolas  Escude 
(Fra)  bt  Andreas  Vinciguerra (Swe) 6-4,  6-4,  6-  3;  16-Mark 
Philippoussis (Aus) bt Andrew Ilie (Aus) 6-4, 7-6 (7- 4) 6-1; 11-
Tim  Henman (GBR) bt Sebastien Grosjean (Fra) 6-1, 6-4,  4-6  7-6 
(8-6); 1-Andre Agassi (U.S.) bt Mariano Zabaleta (Arg) 6- 4, 6-4, 
6-2.

Men's  singles  (second  round): 2-Yevgeny  Kafelnikov  (Rus)  bt 
Daniel  Vacek  (Cze) 6-3, 6-0, 6-1; Christophe  Rochus  (Bel)  bt 
Kevin  Ullyett (Zim) 6-4, 6-4, 6-3; Karim Alami (Mar) bt  Michael 
Llodra  (Fra) 7-6 (7-4), 6-3, 6-2; Stefan Koubek (Aus)  bt  Grant 
Stafford (RSA) 5-7, 7-5, 2-6, 6-2, 6-3; Juan Carlos Ferrero (Esp)  
bt  Laurence Tieleman (Ita) 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, 5-7, 6-7 (5-7),  6-4; 
12-Magnus Norman (Swe) bt Gianluca Pozzi (Ita) 6-4, 6-3, 6-4;  4-
Nicolas  Kiefer  (Ger)  bt Tomas Behrend  (Ger)  7-6,  6-0,  6-2; 
Francisco Clavet (Esp) bt Goran Ivanisevic (Cro) 7-6 (7-5),  6-4, 
6-2. 

Women's  singles  (third round): 4-Mary Pierce  (Fra)  bt  Miriam 
Oremans  (Ned)  6-2,  6-4;  11-Anna  Kournikova  (Rus)  bt  Kveta 
Hrdlickova  (Cze) 2-6, 6-3, 6-4; Jennifer Capriati (U.S.)  bt  Yi 
Jing-Qian (Chn) 6-4, 6-4; Patty Schnyder (Sui) bt Nadejda Petrova 
(Rus) 7-6 (8-6), 4-6, 6-2; Jana Kandarr (Ger) bt Sonya Jeyaseelan 
(Can)  6-2,  0-6,  6-3; 9-Julie  Halard-Decugis  (Fra)  bt  Elena 
Dementieva (Rus) 3-6, 6-4 6-2; Ai Sugiyama (Jpn) bt Asa  Carlsson 
(Swe) 6-4, 4-6, 6-3; 2-Lindsay Davenport (U.S.) bt Alina  Jidkova 
(Rus) 6-0, 6-1.
