
West loses Mhambrey, faces positive South


By Our Special Correspondent

RAJKOT,  JAN. 21. South Zone could only manage 11 players on  the 
eve  of  its  Deodhar Trophy opener against  West  Zone,  but  is 
confident  that  the reinforcements will arrive in time.  On  the 
other  hand,  West lost strike bowler Paras  Mhambrey  through  a 
freak  accident last night and goes into Saturday's match at  the 
Rajkot Municipal Stadium with its morale low.

South's  Karnataka contingent - J. Arun Kumar, Thilak  Naidu  and 
Dodda  Ganesh-is  expected to arrive later this evening  to  lend 
greater  stability  to an outfit already looking sharp  and  keen 
before its Deodhar opener. West has already suffered a defeat  in 
this year's edition, losing to North by 29 runs on Wednesday. 

Mhambrey's injury has come as a bad omen. The Mumbai medium-pacer 
hurt  himself  badly while opening a bathroom window. A  pane  of 
glass  slipped from the window and cut his right foot, causing  a 
deep gash. He was rushed to hospital for emergency surgery and is 
expected to be out of action for at least six weeks,  effectively 
ending  his  season.  West skipper Mongia is now  left  with  the 
option of fielding two medium-pacers and playing another spinner, 
local  left-armer  Rajesh  Garsondia. At  the  nets,  Mongia  did 
mention  that he had great respect for Garsondia's discipline  in 
the shorter version. The former India wicketkeeper added that the 
last  time he led West in the Deodhar Trophy, Garsondia  was  his 
`trump card' against the same opponent at Visakhapatnam.

In all probability, South will leave out N.P. Singh and  Madhukar 
among the five medium-pacers and then decide its batting  line-up 
on  a flat track. Azharuddin and M.S.K. Prasad may not  be  here, 
but   T.  Kumaran has the chance to prove that calling  him  back 
from Australia was an unwise decision. 

The teams:

South  (from): S. Sharath (capt.), Reuben Paul, A.  Nandakishore, 
J.  Arun Kumar, Thilak Naidu, Dodda Ganesh, T.  Kumaran,  Aashish 
Kapoor,  Hemang  Badani,  S.  Mahesh,  S.  Sriram,  N.P.   Singh, 
Sreekumar Nair and N. Madhukar. 

West:  Nayan  Mongia  (capt.), Ajit  Bhoite,  Zahir  Khan,  Wasim 
Jaffer,  Amol  Muzumdar,  Jatin Paranjpe,  Vinod  Kambli,  Nilesh 
Kulkarni,  Abhijit Kale, Iqbal Siddiqui, Sitanshu  Kotak,  Rajesh 
Garsondia, Hitesh Parsanna and Nilesh Modi.

Umpires:  S.K.  Bansal (Del) and Des Raj  (Del).  Match  referee: 
Pankaj Pandey (MP). 
