
Goodwin helps Zimbabwe score 226 


By Ted Corbett 

JOHANNESBURG,  JAN.  22. If only the men of Zimbabwe had  had  as 
much  bounce  as the Wanderers pitch. Despite their  win  in  the 
World  Cup,  Zimbabwe still appears to hold its  neighbours  from 
south  of  the Limpopo River in awe as its first innings  of  226 
confirmed. 

It  has beaten South Africa just the once and although its  coach 
Doug Houghton spoke bravely this week of beating South Africa  on 
its  own soil there was little sign of that when  the  triangular 
tournament opened today under lights.

Zimbabwe's captain Andy Flower won the toss and batted; no  doubt 
concerned  about  the `dew factor' which makes batting  second  a 
risky  business. In addition there were clouds gathering  in  the 
brightest  blue  Johannesburg sky of the year 2000 as  the  match 
began  and even the bravest captain dare not risk a  tussle  with 
the  Duckworth-Lewis  rules that govern these  one-day  games  if 
there is rain.

Neil Johnson and Grant Flower began slowly against Shaun  Pollock 
and  Jacques Kallis. South Africans ask how Pollock will  develop 
if  Donald's  dither  over his trip to India turns  into  a  full 
retirement in the next six months and some wonder whether  Kallis 
would  be the new Martin Crowe if he gave up bowling  altogether. 
At the moment no-one could ask him to do more than he did in  two 
spells which brought him 10-1-34-2.

The  first wicket at 38 in the 13th over went to  Lance  Klusener 
who, on this trampoline pitch got one to keep low and bowl Flower 
who  had  spent  43 deliveries over  19.  Alistair  Campbell  and 
Johnson  took the score to 94 in the 23rd but then three  wickets 
fell for 11 runs at a decisive point. 

The  second  wicket fell to a marvellous throw from  the  wicket-
keeper  Mark Boucher who ten yards towards third man  threw  down 
the bowler's stumps from full 40 yards as Johnson hesitated  over 
a  single. His direct hit reminded us that South Africa  hit  the 
stumps more often than anyone else, and particularly at important 
moments.  Boucher was still wearing his inner glove when  he  let 
fly.  Next  over Campbell skied a ball to mid-off  and  ten  runs 
later  Andy Flower edged a ball from Kallis to  Boucher  standing 
wide.

Now  Murray  Goodwin  and  Stuart  Carlisle  had  the  stage   to 
themselves  but  neither  is  fitted  for  a  leading  role.  The 
expression  `Zimbabwe's aggressive match-winner' does not  spring 
easily  from  the  keyboard; such a creature may  not  exist  and 
against the precise bowling and carefully planned field  settings 
of  South Africa neither had the power nor the finesse  for  what  
was  needed:  a  destructive innings in  the  mould  of  Ponting, 
Tendulkar or Jayasuriya.

Carlisle,  who swept Nick Boje for six was bowled playing  inside 
an ball from Klusener that ducked towards his stumps after he and 
Goodwin  had  put  on 79 in 17 overs and Gary  Whittal  tried  an 
inside-out shot in Hansie Cronje's first over that was caught  at 
cover.

Goodwin reached 50 in 59 balls and turned up the heat as the last 
five overs began and the lights erased the shadows.
