
The owner with an enviable record 


MAM  is  the only owner in the world with such a  big  string  of 
horses   and   an   amazing  tally  of   300   Classics,   writes 
H.S.MANJUNATH.

A FOALING list of the year 2,000 and a bulky Mumbai Auction  Sale 
catalogue find a prominent place on the working desk of Dr. M. A. 
M. Ramaswamy in his opulent Chettinad Palace.

Those two are not mere pieces of racing trivia. They tell a tale. 
The  story of a man who is in relentless pursuit of racing  glory 
in  every  nook  and crany, whose growing strength  is  his  ever 
increasing  weakness for horses. He has overbearingly,  at  times 
grudgingly,   become   part   of  Indian   racing   psyche,   its 
consciousness, its folklore.

Racing  without  MAM is as unthinkable and lifeless  as,  say,  a 
Hamlet on Stage, without the Prince of Denmark. 

Even before the first ray of light makes its mark, MAM is on  his 
phone  catching up with the latest from each one of his  numerous 
trainers  who  look  after nearly 900 of  his  horses  in  active 
training. There is nothing half as compelling in his life as this 
horse talk. 

No  individual owner in the world has a string as big as the  one 
MAM has.

By day-break, MAM would have spoken to each one of his  trainers, 
got   the   feedbacks,  conveyed  his  messages,   thoughts   and 
impressions,  planned  out  a strategy or two.  ``When  I  had  a 
smaller  string I was spending more time with my horses.  With  a 
bigger string I do my best to spend as much time as possible with 
them'',  says  MAM, whose huge business  interests  stretch  from 
Cement to Computers. 

An astonishing quirk is that MAM's racing life began with a  two-
horse base and in 35 years has grown at an amazing progression to 
touch  a four-figure mark if the 240 mares in his sprawling  250-
acre Chettinad Stud Farm are roped in.

At  the  dawn of the new millennium, MAM attained the  rarest  of 
rare  distinctions. He took his Classic score to an  unparalleled 
300  when  Amazing  Girl ticked that  magical  tally  by  winning 
TheHindu  Bangalore  Oaks  on  New Year's  Day.  He  says  he  is 
``overwhelmed''.  He  is 300 Classics to the good,  unbeaten,  as 
strong-willed  as ever to take a fresh ``Guard'' and get on  with 
the game. 

To  him  it is a highly satisfying, pleasurable  experience.  One 
which beckons him to go for more and more.

Racing being what it is knotty, unpredictable, one which  abounds 
in  envious comparisons and generally revels in mystery,  for  an 
individual owner to win close to 8,000 races is stretching  human 
endeavour to its farthest.

History  has a telling point to make. Mr. George Fitzroy  won  20 
Classics between 1813 and 1831 in his colours. Edward Stanly, the 
same number between 1910 to 1945. It took North American Marion H 
Van  Berg  nearly 35 years at the start of the  19th  century  to 
record  the  most life time win by an owner. It stood  at  4,775. 
Against the back-cloth of this cold pile of statistics, the sheer 
numbers reflect the magnitude of MAM's achievement.

Not  all  of MAM's Classics may pass muster as  Classics  in  the 
puritanical  sense. Some of the ``regional ones'' may  be  looked 
down upon as either ``monopolised'' or diluted. Yet in its  final 
content and shape, the significance of this achievement cannot be 
scaled  down.  His Classic list includes  some  truly  remarkable 
equine  successes born out of highly competitive fields in  every 
racing centre.

MAM's  entry  into  the  racing world was as  casual  as  it  was 
unchartered.  College day occasional visits to the races five  or 
six times a year with his father, Rajah Sir Muthiah Chettiar  and 
uncle  Mr. Chidambaram Chettiar touched off his love  for  horses 
and  riding. When his riding skills firmed up, he took  to  polo. 
From  polo  developed  his  desire to own  a  horse.  After  much 
reluctance  and  worldly  advice came that  permission  from  his 
father to own a horse. MAM and his brother set out on that  quest 
for a decent horse. Rolling back 35 odd years to that day at  the 
Bombay  auction sale, MAM recalls that chance buy in its  graphic 
detail. 

``Do you know Rashid Byramji was the one who bought us our  first 
horse,  Silver  Jet from Rajah of Nasarganj. Since  then  I  have 
never  looked  back.  Mark  my words,  it  was  Byramji's  silver 
touch''.  MAM  himself has picked up a great deal of  it  in  the 
years that followed. Even to this day his shrewd horse sense  and 
instant  feel  for good blood get respectful  mention  in  racing 
circles.

Silver  Jet  made the most dramatic of  beginnings.  Jagdish  was 
declared to ride Silver Jet in his debut run. But a fall on Sunny 
Days  in  the  previous  race left  him  with  a  broken  finger. 
Unheralded  M.  J. Iqbal (Now a trainer in  Madras)  stepped  in, 
steered Silver Jet to a five-length win. ``Beginner's luck'', MAM 
proudly  recounts. Little did he know at the time that  a  legend 
draped in Gold, Brown silks was in waiting. Interestingly,  MAM's 
colour  is  neither his choice nor design. IT was indeed  a  gift 
from  a friend, Mr. C. T. Ramanathan who raced in  those  colours 
with Mr. Sam Hill as his trainer.

It  was through Silver Jet (P. Khade up) that MAM got  his  first 
Classic taste, the Bangalore Colts Trial Stakes in 1965 ahead  of 
Mr. Lucky, rather ironic coincidence that the owner of the winner  
was  destined to be one. Religious-minded to the core and  highly 
sentimental, MAM believes everything is destiny. His prophecy  is 
simple. ``Go high, So high''

``Winning post came in time''. Tudor Jet's sensational  Bangalore 
Derby  win  ahead of Mica Empress is still vivid in  his  memory. 
``It  had rained for days, the going was heavy and Tudor Jet  was 
drawn  the farthest. I told Jim Foley (Now MAM's leading  trainer 
down south) to kick away from the 1,000 metres. He came into  the 
straight leading by lengths and eventually won by the shortest of 
margins.  No one would have said a thing if a dead heat had  been 
called.  It was that close''. Tudor Jet holds mirror to what  has 
now  become one of MAM's familiar strengths. His ability to  plan 
out  racing strategies and his penchant for specifics in the  way 
some horses of his are ridden in races. Another striking  example 
of  how  well,  MAM could read the pulse of a horse  was  in  his 
insistence  on Amazing Bay being given a training regimen of  his 
choice  and  his unflinching faith in chalking out  an  elaborate 
plan  for Smart Chieftain the day he saw the  gelding  unleashing 
that spectacular run in the Bangalore Derby.

To many, MAM's racing persona is a riddle, an enigma. He is often 
seen  as  tough and intense, one who takes his racing  ``far  too 
seriously'' than any one can imagine. 

For a man who has benevolence in blood and for whom  philanthropy 
is a family honour and tradition, this tough exterior is somewhat 
puzzling.  But  MAM counters it with a touch of diplomacy.  ``  I 
want honest worth from my professionals. I don't mind giving them 
what  they want.'' It is this stubborness that has often  led  to 
some  break ups here and there and it is this serious outlook  to 
racing that has brought him in the eye of several  controversies. 
But  his defence is stout and direct. ``Tell me in which walk  of 
life there is no controversy. It is part of this game.''

Trainers  who have tuned his horses and jockeys who  have  ridden 
for  him have often spoken highly of his generosity  and  genuine 
concern for their well-being. No doubt there are odd cases  where 
he has been unsparing but the professional lobby is unanimous  in 
its  acknowledgment of the fact that MAM knows his racing  onions 
far too well to be led astray. 

The  most  striking  aspect of MAM's  passionate  involvement  in 
racing his personal attention to his string. He takes interest in 
almost  each and every individual at every centre. `` I  do  take 
lot of interest in my horses but you have to watch other people's 
horses  as well. Your child is good what about the others.  There 
is no Steffi Graf if there is no Zina Garrison.''

There have been some mis-investments and costly failures but  MAM 
says  he  has  one  abiding principle as far  as  his  string  is 
concerned.  ``A  good class I horse and a Class B  get  the  same 
food, same attention, same love. Because it is not their fault. I 
love  my best horse as much as I love my worst. No race or  horse 
has  ever given me heartburns. An owner should first know how  to  
take defeats''

From  the days of trainer Raymond, a succession of good  trainers 
have  worked for MAM's ever expanding empire. After brief  stints 
by  S. J. K. Irani and Fred Black, the arrival of Aris  B.  David 
heralded  a new beginning. The string grew in numbers  to  nearly 
100. ``Aris won a hundred classics for me. He had an uncanny eye 
for good horses. A painstaking professional. I do not know why he 
left me. I wish him all luck''.

``I am lucky to have Jim Foley. In spite of his age he is doing a 
marvellous  job. I have some good professionals working  for  me. 
Robert Foley has won more than 3,000 races for me. I recall  with 
relish  my  association with trainers like Rashid  Byramji,  Aziz 
Mahmood,  P. Corner, R. Alford, Karan Singh,  Madhu  Mangalorkar, 
Imtiaz  Sait,  Bezan Chenoy, Toddywalla,  Haskell  David,  Gurdev 
Singh, Daji.''

``I  am  fortunate to have had the services of some  top  jockeys 
like Willie Carson, Walter Swinburn, Hilton, Cope, Jagdish, Pandu 
Khade,  Jim  Foley, Vasanth Shinde, Pesi  Shroff,  Aslam  Khader, 
Mallesh  Narredu, Sateesh Narredu, Robin Corner,  Jimmy  Fortune, 
Sinclair Marshall, Lloyd Marshall, Still, Fallon, Karan Singh  to 
name but a few''

``I  remember with a tinge of pride some of these horses,  Silver 
Jet,  Fair Court, Tudor Jet, Own Beauty, Red Satin (only  one  to 
have beaten Squanderer), Half A Crown, Own Opinion (won a  record 
number  of  27 races), Ministerella, Star  Supreme,  Amazing  Bay 
(first  Indian  Derby  winner in  his  colours),  Forest  Fantasy 
(highest  stake  earner in the history of  Indian  racing),  Star 
Contender,   Star   Haven,  Exhilaration,  Air   Hostess,   Smart 
Chieftan..''.

MAM  had  his ups and downs and goes back to that  day  when  Own 
Opinion  beat  Royal  Tern  to the Invitation  Cup  as  his  most 
exciting  racing moment. In fact Own Opinion was taken  to  Japan 
Cup where he improved by two seconds his Mumbai timing.

``It  was just good enough for Own Opinion to finish 13th out  of 
15. It shows how tough international racing is''.

``I want to congratulate the Poonawallas for what Astonish did in 
Hong  Kong and Mr. Vijay Mallya for Adler's brave performance  in 
America''.

MAM's sporting interests spread far and wide. He was at the  helm 
of Indian hockey affairs for close to eight years and in his very 
first year he saw India win the World Cup in 1975. The fact  that 
the team has never been able to repeat this feat stands testimony 
to  his  grand  days at the IHF. ``My love  for  hockey  has  not 
diminished.  My  most thrilling sporting moment  was  when  Ashok 
Kumar scored that second goal against Pakistan in that World  Cup 
final.  My  saddest was when India lost to  Australia  after  140 
minutes of bitter fight in the 1976 Montreal Olympics'' 

``I  am  sensitive. I can't stand prejudices. I wanted  India  to 
win. Not individuals. There was too much of pressure on me'' says 
MAM,  who flatly turned down several overtures to return  to  the 
IHF fold.

On  hard-core  racing issues MAM is point  specific.  He  refutes 
widely held belief that racing is for big owners. On the contrary 
he argues that it is more a sport for the smaller ones. 

``Unless new owners come into the game there is no future.  Every 
year  new bloodstock comes in. Similarly new owners  should  also 
come in''. His concern is for spiralling prices on bloodstock. He 
feels  that prices are too prohibitive for smaller owners to  buy 
good, decent horses.

To a pointed question whether there is this fierce rivalry  among 
the  country's three big wigs, he being one, Mr.  Deepak  Khaitan 
and  Mr.  Vijay  Mallya being the other two,  MAM's  repartee  is 
short.``There is nothing of that sort. We are best of friends.''

``I for one do not believe in these Million races'', asserts MAM. 
He is all for splitting these races so that owners other than the 
big guns get a realistic chance to get their pound of flesh.

``What is the point in one or two individuals monopolising  these 
big races. Classics are okay. These Millions should be divided''.

MAM  feels there is too much of racing and a dearth of  efficient 
racing  officials everywhere. Ideal programming should be  three 
days  in a week and he wants clubs to go for double  betting.  He 
says the role of the governments, both Centre and States,  cannot 
be overemphasised. Tax cuts and a higher TDS limit would be vital 
for the sport to beat inflation and falling patronage.

The  key to clean racing, in MAM's estimation, is for  any  horse 
from  any  centre to take part in any race it  is  eligible  for, 
provided Coggins is clear and the rules of the club involved  are 
followed.  ``Nowhere  in the world there  are  restrictions.  Why 
should we have them here''

As to the falling patronage for Madras Racing, MAM's counter  is: 
``MRC  is  225  years  old. It offers  the  best  facilities  and 
concessions  for any trainer. There are no restrictions  at  all. 
Nobody  stops anybody from anywhere. I for one race all over  the 
country including Delhi. Why aren't the others doing''.

MAM  rejects  out of hand racing community concerns that  he  has 
monopolised MRC. ``Doors are open. I can assure you that in 3  or 
4 years MRC will get back into its salad days.''

Death of his personal valet for 30 years on the morning Queen  of 
the  Hills won his 100th Classic deprived him of the  pleasure  a 
landmark  like  that would have given. To him it is  the  saddest 
moment of his racing life. 

Did he at any time feel enough is enough. Amazingly MAM, says  he 
did  early this year. He wanted to keep off buying. He  sought  a 
break.  His  son, Mr. M.A.M.R. Muthiah prevailed  over  him.  The 
result:  A  few  more  scores of  juveniles  added  to  his  ever 
lengthening list.

MAM  spent a few contemplative moments to find the best  possible 
answer for this straight-arrowed question. Now that you have  300 
classics, how far would you go.

``I stop when I get tired''. 

Will he ever? It is for the Guiness to think about.
