
The Indian 'Open': A Close-Up 


YESTERDAY  DETERMINED  where  precisely we  find  ourselves  this 
January  22  morning! As on June 8 at Old Trafford in  the  World 
Cup,  it was an encounter with Pakistan that all but decided  our 
future  in  a prestigious tournament - this time  the  Carlton  & 
United. `Hobarter' away what remains of our standing in Australia 
we  hopefully did not yesterday, as we came to the  clincher  (vs 
Pakistan)  as  an  India  fully rested  from  a  restless  Sachin 
Tendulkar's  itinerant point of view. Why has it to be  Pakistan, 
time  and again, holding our tournament future in the  hollow  of 
its  reverse-swinging  hand? Why are we Indians  ourselves  never 
able to set the pace abroad? Is it a case of the 10 for 74  Kotla 
killer instinct ensuring that `pace' remains an ugly-Aussie four- 
letter word in our cricketing glossary?

The problem in Kangaroo-bouncy Australia begins at the  beginning 
-  the woeful inability and inadequacy on the part of  our  first 
five batsmen to come to grips with the first 40 overs of a C &  U 
set-to  - as the first 80 overs of the Ansett challenge.  It  was 
when Indian cricket had Sunil Gavaskar, Krishnamachari Srikkanth, 
Mohinder  Amarnath, Dilip Vengsarkar and Mohammed  Azharuddin  as 
its  bulwark  first five - to deal tellingly with  the  first  75 
overs of a Test-match innings before the new ball fell due  -that 
the first 35 overs of a one-day contest fell, dovetailingly, into 
total-  building place, for Kapil Dev to step in and deliver  the 
knockout  punch. Bringing up the effective rear here  (before  he 
graduated  as  the Champion of Champions) was a  mentally  extra-
tough chappie called Ravi Shastri. Such was the intrinsic calibre 
of  that  no run-of-the-Binny-mill line-up  that  a  thoroughbred 
technician of the grammatical prowess of Sanjay Manjrekar had  to 
bide  his time. Sanjay could be given his head only late  in  the 
day-and-  night,  so  that this Geoff Boycott  favourite  had  to 
abdicate  and adjourn, to the commentary-box, ahead of his  span. 
Here in the idiot-box, Sanjay Manjrekar and Ravi Shastri are  now 
left to spar in the matter of expounding their shared perceptions 
on the game.

Ravi  Shastri  gutsily worked his way to the top  of  the  Indian 
batting order from the Mumbai ranks. Sanjay Manjrekar,  likewise, 
could have enjoyed greater longevity in the game, had he but been 
receptive,  earlier, to the idea of there being one-day room  for 
him  only at the top. The thing I am pinpointing is what  viewers 
envision as the tele-mindset to open. Some develop this  mindset, 
some don't. Venkatsai Laxman is the classic example of one who is 
not  mentally there, even after notching 167 sweetly struck  runs 
in  whipping the cream off Aussie pace. The rationale in  letting 
Laxman  stay  on  in Australia was that  this  stylist  would  be 
monitor-viewed  to carry on, in the one-day, from where  he  left 
off  in the five. But come the C & U hour to ease the  stress  on 
skipper  Tendulkar and Laxman was witnessed to play and miss  all 
over again - ball after ball! It is obvious therefore - from  the 
renewed  (January  14) Sydney gap between his bat  and  pad  (for  
`V.V.S.'  to be castled by Glenn McGrath for 2) that Laxman  just 
does  not have the fixity of purpose to `close up' his game  when 
he opens.

Does  this mean that, after the current tour, we yet  again  show 
Laxman  the selection door? The concerted effort - after the  way 
Laxman revealed his `on-the-rise' bloodlines with that 167 on the 
third and final (January 4) afternoon of the Sydney Test - should 
be  to see in `V.V.S' the virtuoso with a special spot at  No  5, 
left  open by the fall from dainty grace of Azhar. It  is  rather 
late in the day, I feel, to go into the merits of the  selectors' 
departure  from  the classicism of Azhar. Instead,  let  us  look 
ahead by venturing to reinvent Azhar, at No. 5, via Laxman. To be 
able  to do this without dispensing with the ``Kunwar Ajay'  uses 
of  the  vividly versatile Jadeja (at one-day No. 6),  the  first 
selection  decision  to be maturely made has to  be  that  Laxman 
stays  put  at  No. 5 in  overs-specific  as  in  overs-unlimited 
cricket. From this one stroke-productive change, you will see how 
smoothly the last bit of jigsaw falls neatly into place.

For verily a jigsaw has been Rahul Dravid at one-drop. Such  wild 
fluctuations  has Dravid's career-graph seen (in that key  No.  3 
position) that I feel there is only one antidote - and this is to 
move up Rahul to the opening slot in the one-day and the five-day 
alike.  Dravid  has just the mindframe needed for  this  grinding 
job. And I make this submission in Rahul's enlightened  long-term 
self-interest.

At least in the one-day, it has been observed that, every now and 
then  in  his career, Dravid is just not able to get a  move  on. 
This  does  not matter so much in the five-day, where  Rahul  has 
kitbags  and kitbags of time to get his `Defence of India  Rules' 
act together. But Dravid's getting habitually stuck, every  other 
one-day,  has  been viewed fatally to cramp  India's  run-scoring 
style. This tendency to slow down has also led to Rahul's  making 
eminently avoidable changes in his batting technique - with  what 
results  we  saw in the early part of  this  mind-bending,  body-
testing tour of Australia. I therefore dare say that Rahul Dravid 
and the opening spot (on TV) are made for each other! Dravid is a 
`timeless' talent. And he will have all the time in the world  to 
drop TV anchor, opening for India. He can stay till Deve  Gowda's 
cows come home.

But  Dravid here will have the time to build an innings  only  if 
Rahul  has  the inclination! Laxman failed, time  and  again,  as 
India's  opener simply because he did not have  the  inclination. 
Venkatsai  Laxman's  was an attitude problem like that  of  Vijay 
Hazare  on  the 1946 tour of England. India's  legendary  opening 
pair  on that 1946 tour was Vijay Merchant and Mushtaq Ali -  the 
two  who, a decade earlier, had put on 203 for the first  wicket, 
together, in the July 1936 Manchester Test! Mushtaq 112, Merchant 
114 in a Test match in which the one had been instructed (by  the 
`tour  management')  to  run out the  other!  When  the  grinning 
Mushtaq  let the Cheshire cat out of the bag, as the  two  walked 
out  to  open  on  July 25, 1936,  at  Old  Trafford,  Merchant's  
response was: ``Why don't you really try running me out,  Mush?'' 
The  upshot of it all was that, in the `calling'  uncertainty  so 
created,  the reverse of what was plotted came about  -  Merchant 
(ultimately 33) unwittingly ran out Mushtaq (13)! But that was in 
the  first  innings of the July 1936 Old Trafford Test  in  which 
India  totalled 203. And 203 is what Merchant and Mushtaq put  on 
in the second stab, as this twosome began India's 368 runs-behind 
(successful) quest to save the core match of the series.

The  same Merchant was 10 years older, but the same  Mushtaq  was 
not  10 years wiser, as the two opened the 1946 tour-ball in  the 
traditional  game vs Worcestershire. After that, Mushtaq Ali  was 
left out of the following game vs Oxford University (in which  S. 
W.  Sohoni opened with Vijay Merchant). Whereupon, for the  third 
match  vs  Surrey  at The Oval (in which  Mushtaq  Ali  had  been 
picked), Merchant came up with a revolutionary suggestion for the 
consideration of his skipper, the Nawab of Pataudi (Sr). Observed 
Vijay: ``Since you yourself, skipper, have already expressed  the 
view  that Merchant and Hazare are the two most reliable  batsmen 
in  the  team, what about sending out Hazare to open with  me  in 
this match vs Surrey? If the two of us, skipper, get the team off 
to  a  decent start, the pressure on those coming in,  after  us, 
will be that much less. If the experiment succeeds, if Hazare and 
I  do manage to give the team a good start vs Surrey,  you  could 
even  consider Mushtaq coming in one-down - free to play all  the 
shots he wants!''

The  Merchant  idea  of getting Vijay Hazare  to  open  with  him 
appealed to Pataudi. ``But not to Hazare!'' - as Merchant was  at 
pains  to emphasise to me. ``Even with his iron defence, the  man 
was  just  `not  there' as an  opener!''  Merchant  pointed  out. 
``Hazare was mentally out even before we stepped out together  to 
open! He fell lbw to Alec Bedser for a duck. 

And  as that greatest of medium-pacers I ever faced proceeded  to 
clean-bowl Rusi Modi for a duck, my wonderful suggestion had  led 
to us Indians tumbling to 10 for 2. I did put up a century  stand 
with  Gul  Mahomed  (ultimately  89)  after  that,  before  being 
dismissed just after completing my half-century (53). But it  was 
Hazare's  point of view that was most revealing as I returned  to 
the  dressing-room. `Not every Vijay is an opener!' said  Hazare. 
That said it all as far as Hazare went.''

Like  Hazare,  you  see that Laxman is just  `not  there'  as  an 
opener.  But  Rahul Dravid certainly has the grit,  tenacity  and 
application to be right there at number one, a position in  which 
he  can be his own shot-selection master. The technique, like  in 
the  case  of Vijay Hazare, is there. All that is needed  is  the 
will. Where there is a Dravid will to open, there is a way!  Just 
think  of  how  such an `orderly' change  will  metamorphose  the 
Indian batting order. In a Test match, the first five - whose job 
it traditionally is to play out the first 80 overs before the new 
ball  falls due - become Sadagopan Ramesh, Rahul  Dravid,  Sourav 
Ganguly,  Sachin Tendulkar and Venkatsai Laxman. In the  one-day, 
the first six to tackle the strike-rotating first 40 overs become  
Sourav  Ganguly,  Rahul Dravid, Sachin  Tendulkar,  Robin  Singh, 
Venkatsai Laxman and Ajay Jadeja.

Such  timely  rethink,  will it not give  our  batting  just  the 
flexibility  it needs down the order? My short point is that  the 
time  has  come  to get off Sachin Tendulkar's  back.  The  above 
recast  (with minor modifications, according to the  dictates  of 
the situation) should help give Sachin's batting just the  `shot' 
in  the arm it needs right now. If Vivian Richards could  produce 
all  his mind-blowing shots batting at one-drop in  the  one-day, 
why not Sachin Tendulkar? If `V.V.S.' displayed true artistry  in 
unravelling  such  amazing shots in that tele-riveting  167,  why 
sacrifice  him, at this advanced stage, in chasing the mirage  of 
Azhar,  when  the  wristy  and  willowy  Hyderabadi  solution  is 
rewardingly to lower Laxman down under?

RAJU BHARATAN
