
Feel The Force lands the spoils 


MUMBAI

LAST  SUNDAY will go down as one of the blackest days  in  Indian 
racing.  In order to deflect attention from the fact  that  their 
activities were the subject of scrutiny from the Crime Branch  of 
the Mumbai Police, some bookmakers invaded the weighing room  and 
caused an hour-long interruption of racing. 

Absurd demands like those for declaring the seventh race null and 
void  (because  bookmakers  did not make a  book),  and  for  the 
resignation of the Chairman, were made. The club's security staff 
was  conspicuous by its absence. It was a disgusting  scene,  the 
likes  of which the hallowed portals of the Mahalakshmi  weighing 
room have never seen.

In one sense, the rather-too-vocal leader of the bookmakers,  Mr. 
Ram  Dandekar,  has  done  a signal service  to  racing.  By  his 
reprehensible  behaviour,  he has highlighted the danger  to  the 
sport  of  bowing and scraping before members of his  tribe,  and 
strengthened the case for a Tote monopoly. 

Readers  may  judge from the healthy (and rich)  racing  in  USA, 
Japan,  Hong Kong and France - all which have a Tote  monopoly  - 
and  the ``basket cases'' of England, Ireland and India  -  which 
suffer  the  parasitic  curse of bookmakers - which  of  the  two 
systems is the superior.

The  R.W.I.T.C. Ltd. must grasp the opportunity by  the  forelock 
and suspend licences of the offending bookmakers, preferably  for 
good.  Now that the Tote is fully computerised, it can  certainly 
take  up the load. A little compassion from the Union  Government 
(representations  have  already been made) with  respect  to  tax 
deducted  at source from betting on the Tote will witness  a  sea 
change in the sport. 

The  experience  of  Bangalore  of  maintaining  a  low  rate  of 
deduction on Tote win and place betting has already  demonstrated 
just how much the collections can increase.

Moreover, if the R.W.I.T.C. Ltd. takes the view that the going is 
so  bad it cannot get any worse, it might summon the  courage  to 
give up the crutch of ``stall fees'', and rely on increased  Tote 
collections for revenue. 

With the enhanced aura that horse racing is certain to acquire in 
the  absence  of bookmakers, there is little doubt  that  over  a 
period  of  time, collections in Western  India  will  skyrocket. 
Purely in the interests of racing, Dr. Cyrus Poonawalla took  the 
lead  in  defusing  Sunday's crisis by  shaking  hands  with  the 
offenders - one hopes he will now rise to this occasion as  well. 
All right-thinking racegoers are behind him. 

The  actual  sport  began with Amorosa  earning  a  well-deserved 
bracket  in  the opener. The late-to-hand Placerville  filly  has 
been on the board at both her previous outings and here shed  her 
maiden status with a degree of comfort. 

Aslam Khader continued his association with the attractive  four-
year-old.  Fresh  from a quadruple in Chennai the  previous  day, 
Richard Hughes tried to get Fortune's Wheel up but had to  remain 
content with second.

Trainer  Dhariwal  was  lamenting  the  fact  that  a  brand-new, 
previously  unused  Australian bridle fitted on  his  ward  Great 
Pasha's head snapped in two before the Endurance Stakes. 

The  odds-on  choice bolted and was withdrawn.  Sources  revealed 
that  more than one-third of the bookmakers had not recorded  any 
bets on this runner, and according to an agreement with the club, 
no deduction would therefore be applicable. However, it is learnt 
that there were protests made and the club belatedly announced  a 
60% deduction. 

Great  Pasha's  defection  presented  He's  My  Dasher  with   an 
opportunity to take home the prize.

Formerly   Delhi-based,   Heavy  Weight  was   backed   down   to 
favouritism.  The Mulhollande gelding led into the  straight  but 
weakened as both Brave Venture and Elusive Charm went past him. 

After  a  brief tussle, it was the last-named that  asserted  her 
superiority  to  gain  the  day. For those on  the  side  of  the 
underdog, it was pleasing to see a runner ridden  hands-and-heels 
by  a  raw apprentice (V. Kadam) getting the  better  of  Mallesh 
Narredu and his whalebone!

This  trend  continued through the medium of Cafe  Noire  in  the 
next. F. Aaron provided value for his 5 kg allowance by  steering 
the Manjri-owned homebred to a fine victory in smart time. 

He kept the 18 to 10 shot from Sarosh Mody's yard within striking 
distance and out-pointed Pesi Shroff and Gay Minstrel in the  run 
in. Note Zeisha over a substantially longer trip than the  1,100m 
she was sent out over here.

There  was  never any doubt that Indiscretion is  India's  sprint 
queen.  However, many felt that the weight she had to concede  to 
Prince  Nicholas,  one of her seven rivals  in  Astonish  Trophy, 
would prove decisive. 

As  it happened, after a fantastic battle, Indiscretion (who  had 
made  the  entire  running)  held on by  a  whisker  from  Prince 
Nicholas.  Whatever  may have been their  fancy,  racegoers  gave 
Indiscretion  a vociferous reception as the  gallant  Dhunjibhoy-
owned racemare returned after the photo verdict was announced.

Mallesh  Narredu  rode  like one possessed  astride  the  Katrak- 
trained daughter of Tecorno, while Aslam Khader on the  runner-up 
might  just  have suffered a shade in finding  himself  in  tight 
quarters for a couple of hundred metres in the straight.

By being restricted to maidens, the Mehra and Usha Stud  Juvenile 
Million  for  three-year-olds is nothing more  than  an  ordinary 
maiden race with an extraordinary prize. Experience counts and it 
came as no surprise that three of the first four home were coming 
off  second-placed efforts. Backed down to 5 to 2, the  Sunderji-
trained  Feel The Force continued the good run of the progeny  of 
Conquering  Hero by bounding forward from the third spot to  land 
the prize from a promising newcomer, Lady Moura, who finished  on 
with purpose. Moment Of Truth found the 1,000m trip too sharp and 
was  a  decent  third, ahead of the  sole  outstation  challenger 
Femmer Fatale.

No  bookmakers' odds were recorded in the  Magnasound  Millennium 
Eclipse  Stakes of India, as mentioned earlier, but it's safe  to 
say Saddle Up would have been quoted at odds-on. 

Ignoring the fact that the track was favouring speed (most of the 
eighteen placed horses in the previous six races had been amongst 
the  early leaders), Pesi Shroff chose to position the  favourite 
almost  out of touch as the dozen runners followed each other  in 
Indian file down the backstretch. 

The  champion  five-year-old did put in his usual late  burst  on 
straightening up, but the leeway was too much to bridge under  62 
kg., and he had to give best by a neck to Great Investment.

A  much-improved son of Libor, the bandaged four-year-old  winner 
thus  made history by becoming the first Delhi horse to score  in 
the Eclipse Stakes. Of course, he has been in Western India since 
last  Summer and has been trained - and placed -  beautifully  by 
his current trainer, Ms. Arti Doctor. 

The  fact that Aslam Khader deserted his own stable's Armoury  in 
favour  of  this  mount hinted at  the  confidence  behind  Great 
Investment, who made the most of the fact that he had only 49 kg. 
in the saddle.

Then  followed  the  demonstration  described  earlier,  and  the 
presentation   was  delayed  by  50  minutes,  causing   needless 
embarrassment to the sponsor. 

But  then  such  niceties as decorum seem  to  have  escaped  the 
bookmaking  fraternity, whose obsession with its pocket seems  to 
override all other concerns.

When action resumed, Celestial Light made her first effort of the 
current  season a winning one. She was always in the lead in  the 
scurry,  and was going away at the wire. P. S. Chouhan came  back 
with a wide grin on the 5 to 2 joint favourite. Magansingh  Jodha 
trains the winner.  

The  other  fancied runner, Resplendence, had  every  chance  but 
lacked  the  necessary kick, and it was  the  unconsidered  Peace 
March and Charging Bullet that filled the minor placings.

In fading light, the last race got under and resulted in a  five- 
horse photo. The commentator completely missed mentioning  Omerta 
in  the  early part, as the Topanoora gelding was  masked  by  Jo 
Hukum, who led. 

Despite  his  bandages and the presence of the unheralded  S.  K. 
Jadhav  (a  late replacement for R. Rupesh) in  the  saddle,  the 
Nosher  Cama trainee just nosed out a quartet, of which  Arabella 
was  unlucky  to have had traffic trouble.  The  last-named  will 
recover losses if campaigned over 1,400m. or further.

Thursday's races on the All Weather track almost did not get  off 
the ground, as both the Class II and III races went void. Despite 
the division of the Class IV Highway Star Plate, there were  only 
six  events on the anvil, until - after a good deal  of  cajoling 
and coaxing - trainers contributed enough runners to make a  race 
of an additional Class IV event. 

This opportunity for older horses was grasped by the forelock  by 
Damroo's  Gift,  who  had been racing  consistently  but  without 
success  for over a year. Asad Siddiqui's Tecorno mare  held  off 
Supercop,  to become the first of four Pratap  Stud-bred  winners 
during the afternoon.

A plunge on Say No More came unstuck when that Robellino  gelding 
could not make up the leeway with respect to Final Recovery. 

The last-named was quickly at the helm of affairs from the  start 
and  dictated terms throughout. Having won on the grass at  Pune, 
the Ivor Fernandes-trainee showed he is equally at home on  dirt. 
Bajrang Singh replaced Dilip Singh for the win.

Once sported by illustrious horses campaigned half a century  ago 
by the late Maharaja of Idar, the ``orange, blue and red  hoops'' 
livery  is  now worn by runners belonging to  his  grandson,  Mr. 
Rajendra  Singh Idar. A quick double for these silks  came  about 
through Proper Pride, who presented the leader (Fashion  Delight) 
and  gained the edge when the pace maker cried enough, and  Aunty 
I.  The latter was the more impressive, displaying  an  eagerness 
that  augurs well for the future, and pulling well clear  in  the 
straight.  Make a note of Burning Issue, second to Proper  Pride, 
at only his second start. He can surely win in a similar set.

How much difference rearing makes! The 1997 crop of  Binkhaldoun, 
brought  up in unspoilt sylvan surroundings near Pune,  has  been 
the revelation of the current season, with its members displaying 
ability  of  a  level in complete  contrast  to  that  stallion's 
previous.  Shirley  Valentine  upheld the form  of  her  previous 
effort and became Binkhaldoun's fourth juvenile winner in just 10 
weeks. Owner-trainer Don Surti's ward was never threatened in the  
Mayor's Trophy, while the heavily backed Momentous Mover ended up 
a  tame third. Safarando was an interesting second in  an  effort 
that hinted at better things to come.

All  the gossip at the track was centred on Magan  Singh  Jodha's 
Thunder  Struck, with the Tecorno gelding starting at 16  to  10. 
Once  the hapless Fabulous Fiorella surrendered  tamely,  Thunder 
Struck surged clear and was going further and further away as  he 
trounced his opposition. 

Both Thanks and Backburn Rocket, who occupied the minor placings, 
came from way behind, which suggests the all weather track is not 
as speed-biased as it was last year.

A tremendous battle brought the proceedings to a close. In a near 
thing,  Mallesh  Narredu's superior riding titled the  scales  in 
favour  of  his mount. Court Of Appeal, from  the  Imran  Shaikh-
ridden Impartial. 

There  was only a whisker in it, leading to the  conclusion  that 
the  race  was  probably decided at  the  declaration  stage  the 
previous  day  when  the runner- up drew post  No.  13,  and  the 
ultimate winner got the favoured No. 2 gate!

DARK LEGEND
