
Unique spiritual savants


CHENNAI,  JAN.  22.  Among those who turn  Godward  during  their 
worldly  sojourn with the conviction that the objective of  human 
birth  is to put an end to bondage which causes  rebirths,  there 
are two types. The first kind has very little stock of  spiritual 
merit but they have yearning for liberation and hence require the 
guidance  of a teacher (Bodha Guru) who can direct them  so  that 
they  can  progress on the spiritual path.  But  their  spiritual 
evolution is possible only till a certain level.

The second type of spiritual aspirant is the one who has gained a 
lot  of  spiritual merit and thus is ready to be initiated  by  a 
spiritual  teacher (Avabodha Guru). The desire for liberation  is 
very  strong in him and he longs to meet someone who  can  enable 
him to envision God. 

The meeting of Swami Vivekananda and Sri Ramakrishna  Paramahamsa 
is  a classic example of such a Guru and a disciple. Narendra  as 
he was known then wanted to meet ``one who has seen God'' and  it 
was  his intense craving for that ultimate experience which  took 
him  to his Guru Ramakrishna. What is essential is that the  Guru 
must be a realised person and the disciple must have the maturity 
to benefit from such a Guru.

In  his  discourse, Sri Sivakumar said that Tirumoolar,  a  great 
Saiva  mystic, had stated categorically that if the Guru  or  the 
disciple  did not have the necessary maturity  their  association 
would be counterproductive like the case of the blind leading the 
blind.  Siddhas  are  Self-realised  souls  who  can  with  their 
spiritual  power  initiate  those  who  have  attained  spiritual 
maturity.  There  has been a hoary tradition of  Siddhas  in  the 
Saiva tradition and their origin can be traced to the Vedic times 
and to Lord Siva Himself.

The  singular contribution of the Siddhas, besides their  primary 
status  as  spiritual  savants,  is to  the  field  of  medicine. 
According to traditional accounts the number of Siddhas runs into 
lakhs  spanning  the four Yugas. Primarily they are 18  and  this 
number is indicative of the groups within them. The Tevaram songs 
mention  Siddhas  and the Agattiyar Tevara Tirattu  is  a  manual 
codified by Sage Agastya who is one of the pioneers in the Siddha 
tradition.  It  is  believed  that  Lord  Siva  sent  Agastya  to 
propagate the Siddha system for the benefit of humanity.

Tirumoolar  is  the next Siddha of importance.  Traditional  lore 
says  that he lived for 3000 years engaged all the time in  yogic 
contemplation  and  composed his work Tirumandiram, which  is  in 
3000  verses, at the rate of one verse every year. That he was  a 
realised soul well-versed in Siddha practices is evident from his 
biographical accounts and also his work which is an inspired hymn 
of great spiritual merit.
