
Born to be free 


USHA JESUDASAN

How do those who commit their lives to freedom, for tolerance and 
for  peace, get to be this way? Are they born this way? Are  they 
moulded  by someone else? Or, do they get to be this way  because 
they  are sensitive to what they see and experience around  them? 
Those  who believe in freedom for themselves and for  others  are 
called "freedom fighters".

How  does  the  word  "freedom fighter" make  you  feel?  Do  you 
automatically think of old men in Gandhian clothes? Do you  think 
of  a  masked  terrorist with a gun? Does it  make  you  cynical, 
thinking  that there is no such thing as freedom? Or do you  feel 
inspired and stirred, wishing you could be one too?

Nelson  Mandela  is one of the freedom fighters of the  last  two 
decades whom I admire. He is at heart, just like you and me -  an 
ordinary person. Yet, he used his experiences, his sensitivity to 
fight for all that he believed in. Mandela was the foster son  of 
a  Tembu  African chief and he grew up in a two culture  world  - 
that  of  his traditional African family and the culture  of  the 
white man who was ruling his country. 

He  trained  to be a lawyer and could have  lived  a  comfortable 
life.  But  he  saw his people around him suffer.  The  poor  who 
already  lived  in miserable circumstances were  also  constantly 
harassed.  There was no dignity in being a black man,  there  was 
always  some kind of injustice. Although he lived  a  comfortable 
life,  Mandela  could  not close his eyes to  the  suffering  and 
injustice around him. He felt that every time an act of injustice 
or  violence was meted out to someone which caused them pain,  it 
was done to him too.

One day, Mandela and his friend Paul were standing outside a post 
office.  The  local magistrate, a white man,came up to  Paul  and 
said, "Go and buy me some stamps, boy." It was quite common for a 
white person to get a black person to do some chore or the other. 
Paul was not going to take the money, neither was he going to  be 
ordered around by a white man. The magistrate was furious.

"Do you know who I am?" he asked.

"It  is not necessary for me to know who you are," said Paul.  "I 
know what you are. You threaten and harass my people in a hundred 
ways every day."

Mandela  says  that he almost died with embarrassment.  He  would 
have  gone in and quietly bought the stamps and not made  such  a 
fuss.  After all he was used to this kind of treatment. This  was 
the  way of life in South Africa. But he admired the  stand  Paul 
took.  "For the first time, I realised that a black man does  not  
have to accept all the indignities heaped on him every day,  that 
there  was  another way to live." He had just seen a  glimpse  of 
dignity, and he knew that it was worth fighting for. Thus began a 
new phase in his life, the quest for the freedom and dignity that 
was the right of every human being.

Thus  began  the anti-apartheid defiance of the  apartheid  laws. 
Mandela  and  his activist friends knew that the State  was  much 
more  powerful than they were, and that any show of  violence  on 
their  part  would  crush them  even  before  beginning.  Greatly 
influenced  by  Gandhiji  and the principle  of  non-violence  in 
achieving  freedom, Mandela chose to campaign  against  apartheid 
without  any violence. In the six months of the  campaign,  there 
was not a single act of violence and the campaign was a  success. 
Says  Mandela,  "I  had  a  great  feeling  of  satisfaction  and 
accomplishment.  I had been engaged in a just cause and  had  the 
strength to fight for it... it liberated me from being afraid and 
overwhelmed by power and the white man's invincibility."

What  qualities  do  freedom  fighters need?  To  begin  with,  a 
discerning mind that hankers after the truth. The respect,  trust 
and loyalty of one's fellowmen and women depend not just on sweet 
inspiring words but on the transparency and sincerity that  comes 
from the inside.

Then, one needs a strong belief in unity and solidarity, and  the 
ability to bring different kinds of people together, for the same 
cause.  A belief in the concept of brotherhood is essential  too. 
Freedom  fighters also have to be able to sacrifice  some  things 
dear  to  their  heart, for they have little  time  for  personal 
pleasures,  a normal family life and the joys other  people  take 
for granted.

In our country today, we too desperately need "freedom  fighters" 
as we are oppressed by corruption, dishonesty, poverty,  disease, 
injustice,  inequality  and  communal  violence.  Where  are  our 
freedom  fighters?  Fifty years ago, the slogan "one  nation  one 
people" was raised by those who believed in equality,  injustice, 
in progress and education and a reasonable standard of living for 
everyone.  But  today, although there has been progress  in  some 
areas, poverty and disease had not decreased.

Do you think, "What can I do? I am just an ordinary person.  What 
difference  can I make?" Let me assure you that in the fight  for 
justice,  equality, peace and freedom every person  has  suffered 
indignities.  And it important to remember that every person  who 
believes in freedom makes a difference. 

Look  at  the life of Nelson Mandela. He was an  ordinary  person 
too...just like you and me. But he helped set a nation free.
