
Realistic story- telling 


Neve, an imprint of Business Publications Inc has brought out The 
Broken Flute and It Happened That Year for children. Here we have 
no  fast paced fantasy but a realistic brand of  writing  dealing 
with family relationships and personal predicaments at school  or 
home situations. 

Writer Bubla Basu has her own distinctive narrative voice as  she 
recounts the adventures of the infamous five in It Happened  That 
Year.  Vikram,  the  Math wizard,  Amita  the  voracious  reader, 
complaint box Pia, aspiring tennis star Rakesh, handsome Dev  and 
too-casual  Rhea become alive as any one of your  classmates  who 
shares your school time. The author confesses that she too can be 
found  somewhere amid the pages of this book and hopes  that  her 
"years  on  either side of the desk can make the  characters  and 
events  as much a part of your life as they are of  mine."  Class 
VIII was a memorable one for the infamous five mainly because  of 
their  teacher who was "auntie Bulan" to them, who brought  "them 
closer  to  themselves".  With her, the children  felt  safe  and 
supported.  The  laws the children thought could not  change  for 
life became changeable once they realised that one made  constant 
choices  in life and by these choices they could change  existing 
conditions. 

The  writer seems to be capable of looking at life from  multiple 
points  of view. She has serious things to say like "You have  to 
let  people go and you have to let go of people." Even while  the 
little  episodes  are  resolved,  thankfully  due  to  the   kind 
intervention  of Aunt Bulan, children learn that it is  necessary 
"to  be free, free to be, free to love and free to  think."  This 
will  appeal to the teenager seeking for ways to protest  against 
establishment.                      

The  Broken Flute begins on a solemn note. The  children,  Nishad 
and Maya live with their mother and the faithful retainer  Govind 
in  a  flat in Bombay. Govind plays the flute  and  the  children 
develop  an ear for their good music. They miss their father  who 
has succumbed to brain tumour. Mother practises medicine and does 
not let the tragedy of the past loom large in their lives by  her 
sensible  approach to issues. The children often accompany  their 
mother to her clinic where they meet the "Mystery Man" who  turns 
out to be a celebrity living as a recluse. What follows is almost 
formula based and we can take a good guess as to the ending  that 
concludes the story in a fairy tale fashion. 

Sharada Dwivedi's story language is interesting and although many 
of the chapters could have been condensed and the narrative  line 
sags in the middle, we are happy for Nishad and Maya that  events 
turn out as they do and together they are all one complete family 
once more. 

Mario  Miranda's  illustrations are capable of telling  the  tale  
without the aid of the text. With effortless strokes he  succeeds 
in  creating  the ambience of a Bombay flat and  the  two  lively 
children  setting  out to put matters right for  the  others  and 
themselves.

There has been a general lament that we do not have a full length 
story  for children in the manner of Heidi or  Treasure  Seekers. 
Indian  authors and publishers are trying to mend this  situation 
with  tales  centering  on  school life,  tales  of  mystery  and 
realism.  However,  while experimenting it is vital  to  remember 
that the author should use a narrative tone which would speak  to 
the  "inner  child" and this eventually will win  their  books  a 
permanent place in the gallery of children's classics.

PREMA SRINIVASAN
