
Music for the soul... in the other world 


Ringing  Thunder  was an interesting exhibition held at  the  San 
Diego  museum  of Art. It was a display of art which  brought  to 
light  the  legacies of China's ancient regional  culture,  "Tomb 
Treasures" from Ancient China.

In the summer of 1978, excavations at the tomb of Marquis Yi Zeng 
in   the   Hubei  province  uncovered  65  bronze   bells   known 
collectively  as  a bianzog and used for  ritual  and  ceremonial 
occasions, which had been buried since 433 B.C.

It  was  the time when the Parthenon being built  in  Greece  and 
Celtic settlements were springing up in Northern Europe, and  the 
Chinese  states  were divided by war. Rival  kingdoms  constantly 
battled  and it took two more centuries before the first  Emperor 
could unify the country.

During this time there lived a Marquis Yi of the State of Zeng, a 
wealthy man of status and power who made his home in what is  now 
known as Hubei province in South Eastern China. The Marquis lived 
a life of opulence and grandeur, yet he was constantly on  guard. 
When the Marquis died in 433 B.C. he was buried in a lavish  four 
chamber tomb, surrounded by trappings of an aristocratic life - a 
life preoccupied with the instruments of war, ritual worship  and 
luxury. As befitting his status, 21 other people were buried with 
the  Marquis  to  serve him in after  life  including  his  wife, 
concubines, servants and dog.

A  set of 65 bronze bells and a complete set of 32  stone  chimes 
were among the 10,000 items that filled the Marquis' tomb.  These 
musical  instruments were used for ritual and  entertainment  and 
were  buried with the Marquis so that he could continue to  enjoy 
their  music in the next world. History has it that  the  Marquis 
spent  huge sums of money ensuring that his after life  reflected 
his wealth.

Among  the items filling the chambers were an exquisitely  carved 
jade  ornamental  pendant, an auspicious bronze sculpture  of  an 
antlered crane, an ornate covered food bowl made entirely of gold 
and  hundreds  of weapons including fearsome spears  with  spiked 
edges.  A highly decorative cast bronze sword and an  intricately 
designed  lacquer  shield.  All this was  included  so  that  the 
Marquis  would continue to live a life of aristrocracy and  power 
in the nether world.

Two  hundred  years  after the death of the  Marquis,  China  was 
unified.  Buried  for 2,400 years, the tomb was  rediscovered  by 
archeologists in 1978 and became the property of Hubei Provincial 
Museum and the Peoples Republic of China.

The  historic San Diego Museum of Art is one of the  largest  Art 
museums  in the U.S. The San Diego Symphony, Jung Ho  Pak  artist  
director and conductor with Felix Fan celloist and the San  Diego 
children  choir, with Polly Campbell music director  featured  in 
the programme "Imperial bells of China". Each bell represented  a 
particular  note,  something like our jalatarangam  with  several 
more varying notes.

The  symphony  was divided into three parts - Heaven,  Earth  and 
Mankind.  Heaven began with a haunting voice of the celloist,  an 
ancient   spirit  that  has  witnessed  a  turbulent  past.   The 
children's  voices  angelic  and pure mingled with  that  of  the 
celloist  and  the  sonorous  rumbling,  regal  chiming  and  the 
tingling of the bells blended well. The biazongs melody was grand 
like something rising from the earth. The earth wove the elements 
of  nature. The musical materials are carefully mixed to  give  a 
magical  quality. And Mankind commemorates those who  fought  and 
suffered  in the war. Then songs of peace and joy and  a  lullaby 
that was a reunification of nature.

ANNA VARKI
