
Emerald treasures 


If you want to sight animals, visit a sanctuary or National  Park 
during  summer. The reason is that animals come out in search  of 
water when the waterholedryup.

But  to  visit  a forest soon after the monsoon  is  a  thrilling 
experience and sighting animals is only a part of it. And this is 
what I felt after a visit in October to the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Park in Karnataka in the Nagarhole range. Your eyes meet only the 
beauty  of the soothing colours of nature and in particular,  the 
different shades of green.

The brownish green bark, reddish green of tender leaves and buds, 
bluish  green  of slender stems of creepers, yellowish  green  of 
falling leaves make the forest look an emerald haven.

Our  trips inside the forests were filled with anticipation.  The 
herds of cheetal greeted us at almost every turn. A few  sambhars 
were cooling their heels in the muddy waters and there was also a 
lone barking deer. Mongoose, doles and wild boar were the smaller 
creatures of the jungle that were prominently noticeable.

We  saw wild boar in large number, running in and out  of  shrubs 
and bushes. One could hardly believe that these seemingly  gentle 
creatures  turn  violent at times. In contrast, the  Indian  Gaur 
looked large and fierceful, watching our vehicle from a distance. 
Elephants  looked on calmly and did not bother about  the  moving 
vehicle or the flash of the camera.

There  is  a definite thrill in trekking where one can  feel  the 
earth  and touch the cool gurgling waters of the flowing  streams 
and  watch  the  colourful butterflies, birds  and  the  numerous 
insects  around. As trekking is prohibited inside the forest  for 
safety reasons, a walk to Irpu Falls seemed the next best choice.

The  jeep ride takes you through forest, paddy fields and  coffee 
plantations. The coffee flowers in bloom give a scented aroma  to 
the  clean fresh air. Oranges are still green, may be a month  or 
two to go before they will be ready for the market.

Just  as  one is mesmerised by the beauty of this  paradise,  the 
running commentary by the guard comes as a shock, awakening one's 
inner senses. Centuries ago, tribals inhabited the area which was 
one large forest cover. Man and animal had lived in peace without 
encroaching upon each other's area. The tribals knew the value of 
preserving the forest and had treasured them.

With  the introduction of plantations, the forest hills and  open 
areas  were converted into commercial centres turning coffee  and 
tea leaves into currency. Many tribals became plantation  workers 
and  slowly  the  forest  land  was  used,  and  cultivable  land 
stretched  into  the jungle periphery. The  introduction  of  the  
Forest  Preservation  Act  was seen as a silver  lining  in  this 
situation.

Now,  with the increase in population and the general demand  for 
land,  there  is a constant fight for survival  between  man  and 
animal.

The  lush  green growth of the paddy fields is a  temptation  for 
elephants and they cross borders causing damage to the fields and 
often meeting their end.

The  forest  with  its immeasurable treasures  are  destroyed  by 
poachers and smugglers. Round-the-clock vigil is also  maintained 
by the forest department in the core area.

Every  visitor to a sanctuary or National Park must take care  to 
preserve the natural wealth and not turn it into a dumping ground 
of  plastic,  bottles or pollute the place with  loud  music  and 
disturb the peace there.

Many times forest officials are hesitant to give permission  even 
to  researchers  and  study  groups.  Because  of  this,  booking 
accommodation  in  a  forest  lodge  or  guest  house  becomes  a 
laborious procedure. But one cannot blame the officials.

Creating various awareness programmes for the public,  explaining 
the importance of preserving the forests and the co-operation  of 
the visitor must be communicated using different media. 

Social forestry schemes for poor tribals living near the  forests 
must  be implemented. Very strict law codes and  punishments  for 
culprits  are  some  of the measures that  can  bring  about  the 
desired results in preserving our forests.

PRINCESS NAIK
