
Ideas and options 


The second Saturday of January was different. About 300  children 
from seven city schools (Vidya Mandir, Asan Memorial School,  AMM 
Matric.,  DAV Boys School, Jaigopal Garodia, National Public  and 
Chettinad  Vidyashram) gathered at the Savera Hotel, Chennai,  to 
participate   in  The  Hindu's  Newspaper  in   Education   (NIE) 
programme. This was the first time such a programme was organised 
in Chennai by The Hindu.

The Career Fair began with an address by The Hindu's Joint Editor 
Ms. Nirmala Lakshman. She said that The Hindu Young World,  which 
began  10  years ago, was for children and she hoped  that  those 
present  had grown up with it. It was The Hindu's  commitment  to 
society and education that prompted the birth of the new  monthly 
supplement  Quest - an interactive forum for  teachers,  students 
and  parents.  The  column,  "Activity  Room"  would  help   make 
newspaper  reading  more interesting and fun  for  children,  she 
said.

Capt.N.S.Ramachandran,  retired Deputy Managing Director,  Indian 
Airlines began with a talk on civil aviation. It was an  exciting 
career  but one that required discipline and mental  courage,  he 
said. Some of the girls wanted to know whether there were special 
privileges  and packages for women. But in this day of  equality, 
men and women were to get the same privileges.

Medical science has opened up new avenues of career options, said 
Dr.  M.S.Ravi,  Reader,  Department  of  Dentistry,   Ramachandra 
Medical  College,  Chennai. He pointed out that there  were  many 
options  in  the field of medicine. He spoke about  physical  and 
occupational therapy, nuclear medicine, bio-medical  engineering, 
cybernetics and many more such. 

In  this age of computers, it is a field of natural  choice.  Mr. 
C.M.Krishnaswamy,  a certified Information Systems Auditor  spoke 
of various options and the tremendous change taking place.  There 
was  scope in Data Warehousing, System Audit, Quality,  Security, 
Web  Publishing/Designing,  to  name  a  few.  Many  participants 
wondered  how long the boom would last and he assured  them  that 
there would be a constant need for trained professionals at least 
for the next 20 years.

Ms.  Sujatha Shankar, architect and interior  designer,  reversed 
the  pattern  by beginning with a question thrown  to  the  eager 
young audience. Architecture is a blend of art and science,  she 
said. There is a bright future for architecture in fields such as 
conservation,  urban  design,  animation,  advertising  and   set 
design.   After  providing  comprehensive  information   on   job 
prospects,  she  deftly  answered questions  on  topics  such  as 
interior design and the average income of an architect.

The hospitality industry is booming all over the globe like never  
before.   There  is  big  money  in  this  line  and   tremendous 
opportunities  for a career, began Mr. Anto Tharappen,  chairman, 
Canan  School of Catering and Hotel Management, Nerkundram.  Food 
stylists,  dietitians,  housekeepers, frontofficemen,  chefs  are 
just  a  few  of the many caps you can don when  you  enter  this 
avenue. 

Still  the most popular of fields of study, engineering, had  the 
students  under its spell, when Dr.T.V. Krishnamoorthy  took  the 
stage.  He  presented a step by step account of how to  go  about 
writing  the entrance examinations for IIT, BITS Pilani,  Rourkee 
and  TNPCEE  and  entering  the  august  portals  of  the   famed 
institutions.  The criteria, date, time and pattern of  the  exam 
papers, the nitty-gritty of applying for the courses were covered 
in meticulous fashion. Ms.Geeta Prabhu of AIMS helped co-ordinate 
the  question-answer session. Mr.K.Ramakrishnan,  NIE  Consultant 
proposed the vote of thanks.

SELINE AUGUSTINE and NIMI KURIAN
