
The king of herbs 


The Tulsi plant seen in most Hindu homes, is known as the Holy or 
Sacred Basil (Botanical name: Ocimum Sanctum). It is an  aromatic 
herb. The leaves of this plant are used in worship and also  have 
medicinal  and curative properties. The name probably comes  from 
the  Greek  Besileus,  meaning "King". There  are  at  least  150 
varieties of basil in the world.

In the olden days, temples served as rest-houses for  travellers. 
The  Tulsi  plant was grown outside the temples  because  of  its 
unique  property of curbing thirst. A couple of leaves under  the 
tongue and the weary traveller looking for water would feel  less 
thirsty.  The  basil, a native of India, reached  western  Europe 
only  in  the 16th century. Now it is widely grown all  over  the 
world.

Every  part of the tulsi plant, from roots to  leaves,  possesses 
health-giving  properties.  Its use as a  medicine  in  different 
ailments  has  been  known from ancient times  in  the  Ayurvedic 
system.  The  leaves of the basil yield an  essential  oil  which 
contains eugenol, carvacrol, methyl eugenol and caryophyllene. It 
has the property of destroying bacteria and insects. The juice of 
the  leaves  is  used  in treatment  of  bronchitis  and  gastric 
disorders.  The  leaves  act as a nerve  tonic  and  sharpen  the 
memory.  They promote the removal of catarrhal matter and  phlegm 
from the bronchial tubes. Chewing tulsi leaves is said to cure  a 
headache. For severe migraine, inhale the essential oil of  basil 
dropped in boiling water, or drink basil tea.

It is widely believed that the juice of tulsi leaves, mixed  with 
a  little honey, taken daily is good for health. If a  couple  of 
leaves have been added while boiling the water for tea, it has  a 
distinct  flavour and taste, and is also good for health.  It  is 
also  soothing  and relieves tension. Made with either  fresh  or 
dried  tulsi leaves, basil tea brings about a  mild  perspiration 
and  with the addition of a pinch of ground cloves and  cinnamon, 
it reduces fever as well.

Tulsi  juice  helps  to combat vomitting.  To  combat  a  general 
feeling of nausea or queasiness, try simmering a pinch of freshly 
grated  ginger with a few leaves of basil in a mug of  hot  water 
for 10 minutes and drink it.

The leaf juice when taken orally is found to be effective in  the 
treatment  of  ear-ache.   A mix of tulsi juice  and  lime  helps 
control  ringworm. Chewing tulsi leaves daily ensures that  worms 
do  not  thrive.  It is an antiseptic and  relieves  pain,  cures 
insomnia and eases vertigo and epilepsy. Recent studies show that 
tulsi also helps fight cancer.

ANJANA MAITRA-SINHA
