
India for another Ministerial meet


DAVOS,   JAN.   30.  India  today  proposed   convening   another 
ministerial meeting to ``consider'' a new trade round and  called 
for  hammering out a ``consensus'' at the official level on  ways 
to further liberalise world markets.

The  Union  Finance  Minister,  Mr.  Yashwant  Sinha,  during  an 
informal  gathering  of  ministers and chief  executives  at  the 
ongoing  meeting  of the World Economic Forum, said  ``much  more 
work''  should  be  done by the Ambassadors of  the  World  Trade 
Organisation in Geneva to help evolve a consensus.

Mr. Sinha's comments marked India's first reaction after the U.S. 
President,  Mr. Bill Clinton, in his address said Washington  was 
opposed  to putting off a new trade round and that the  interests 
of the developing countries should not be ignored.

Mr. Sinha said a flexible approach should be adopted while taking 
measures  to launch a new trade round. Consensus  eluded  several 
issues   including   environment   and   labour   standards   and 
agricultural  subsidies  during the WTO  ministerial  meeting  in 
Seattle  last month causing a collapse of the planned  launch  of 
the new round of trade talks.

Ministers from China, Japan and South Korea and chief  executives 
of   ABB  and  Novartis  were  among  the  participants  at   the 
deliberations  presided over by the Swiss Economy  Minister,  Mr. 
Pascal Couchepin.

Mr.   Sinha   told  the  meeting  that   the   inevitability   of 
globalisation  has cast a ``heavy responsibility''  on  political 
leaders  to  take  necessary  steps  to  achieve  larger  growth. 
Globalisation  should  lead  to a  ``high  ground''  of  reducing 
unemployment  and  reduction in poverty. Recent  experiences  had 
shown  that globalisation had led to destabilisation of  economy, 
he  said  and called for strict adherence  to  domestic  policies 
relating to financial sector management and prudent management of 
external debt.

Sinha allays fears

Earlier in an informal meeting with top business executives,  Mr. 
Sinha  allayed  their fears over hurdles in setting up  of  power 
plants, asserting that a ``vigorous push'' was being given to the 
power sector reforms in the country.

There  appear  to be ``distortions'' abroad on  the  steps  being 
taken  to  remove bottlenecks in getting foreign funds,  he  said 
about  the  ``impression'' abroad that foreign  companies  needed 
``hundreds  of  clearances'' as in the case of  the  Enron  power 
plant in Maharashtra.

He told the executives that State Governments were in the process 
of  unbridling the state electricity boards and streamlining  the 
functioning of regulatory bodies.

An Enron representative said that the Dabhol plant, with  Enron's 
participation,  was the first mega power project with  a  foreign 
partner  after launching of economic reforms and therefore  there 
were bound to be a few teething troubles.

India must convey a strong message to the international community 
that the days of red tape and extensive state-ownership were over 
and  that economic liberalisation was being pursued  with  active 
vigour, the business executives said.

India had ``tremendous advantages'' and could ``outstrip''  China 
in  getting  foreign  investments  if  it  could  ``get  its  act 
together'',  Mr.  Sinha was told. The Government  should  further 
streamline  procedures  for getting necessary approvals,  it  was 
suggested.

Mr. Sinha's interaction with the businessmen at a private meeting 
of the ``business interaction group of India'' and at the working 
dinner was his first major engagement since his arrival here last 
afternoon.  He could not participate in the main plenary  session 
of  the  WEF  theme  ``redefining  the  roles  of  business   and 
government  for the 21st century'' as he had reached Davos a  few 
minutes before the session began.

He informed the meeting,regarding the uncertainty in the  telecom 
sector   following  some  confusion  on  the  regulatory   front, 
``everything has been sorted out. There need not be any doubts.''

The  Finance  Minister also sought to clear the  impression  that 
development in Information Technology was confined only to Andhra 
Pradesh and Karnataka. 

- PTI
