
BPP sore over NDA accord for Bihar


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN.  30.  After weeks  of  wrangling,  the  BJP-led 
National   Democratic  Alliance  today  produced   a   half-baked 
agreement on seat-sharing in Bihar with one of its constituents - 
the Bihar People's Party of Mr. Anand Mohan - refusing to sign it 
and  even threatening to walk out of the alliance if  his  demand 
for eight more seats was not accepted. He was not satisfied  with 
the  20 seats allotted to his party, and was  particularly  upset 
that  it had been denied the Araria seat once held by  his  wife, 
Ms. Lovely Anand.

Mr.  Anand Mohan did not sign a joint statement issued on  behalf 
of the NDA here this evening and nor was he present at the  press 
conference where it was released by three grim-faced NDA  leaders 
-  Mr. Kailashpati Mishra (BJP), Ms. Jaya Jaitley  (Samata  Party 
and  Mr.  Sharad Yadav (Janata Dal-U) - all  signatories  to  the 
statement. 

They  put  up a brave face saying they were  confident  that  Mr. 
Anand Mohan would relent, and the Samata Party leader, Mr. George 
Fernandes, was reported to be trying to persuade him. The  reason 
for his absence, it was stated, was that he was too tired after a 
sleepless night spent in sorting out the differences. Independent 
inquiries,  however, showed that he was very much up  and  about; 
and  wanted  the Prime Minister to intervene. Those who  met  him 
during the day said he was extremely angry.

The  joint  statement  identified the 324  seats  which  the  NDA 
constituents would contest though differences over 33 seats which 
would  go  the polls on February 12 remained unresolved.  If  the 
tangle  is  not  resolved,  these  seats  would  see  NDA  allies 
contesting  against  each  other. Senior  NDA  leaders,  however, 
expressed the hope of persuading the ``rebels'' to retire  saying 
that  alternatively the NDA would formally declare the  names  of 
its ``authorised'' candidates.

Mr.  Kailashpati Mishra, who did much of the  talking,  expressed 
satisfaction  with  the  agreement and  complimented  Mr.  L.  K. 
Advani,  Mr. Sharad Yadav and Mr. George Fernandes for making  it 
possible to put up a joint front against Mr. Laloo Prasad Yadav's 
Rashtriya  Janata Dal. The NDA, he said, would oppose the RJD  in 
each  of  the 324 seats with the BJP contesting  150  seats,  the 
Samata 90, the JD(U) 64 and the BPP 20.

Though  the  NDA constituents would contest on  their  own  party 
symbols, there would be a common manifesto and a joint  campaign, 
he  said. He saw it as the beginning of the end of  ``the  jungle 
raj'' in Bihar.

Mr.  Mishra  admitted  that  the  agreement  had  left   everyone  
``uniformly unhappy'' but pointed out that the NDA would try  and 
make  the  best  of  the  bargain.  Defeating  the  RJD  was  its 
overriding priority and he was confident the NDA would win and be 
in a position to form a Government in the State. Mr. Sharad Yadav 
endorsed  his  views  while Ms. Jaitley said  the  agreement  had 
proved the sceptics wrong.

BJP list for Haryana

Earlier, the BJP released a list of 24 candidates for the Haryana 
Assembly  elections.  The  party spokesperson,  Mr.  M.  Venkaiah 
Naidu,  said  the  party  intended to contest  30  seats  and  an 
agreement  on  27  seats with the Indian  National  Lok  Dal  had 
already  been reached; and the party had cleared the names of  24 
candidates. Three sitting MLAs had been dropped.

About  Orissa,  he  said  talks  with  the  Biju  Janata  Dal  on 
identifying the seats were going on and ``a lot of progress'' had 
been  made.  The  identification  process  was  expected  to   be 
completed  by Monday. The BJP would contest 84 seats and the  BJD 
63.

Mr.  Naidu  declined  to  comment  when  asked  if  the  NDA  was 
projecting  anyone  as Chief Minister in Orissa.  The  issue,  he 
said, would be decided after the elections.
