
Pak. 'ready' to abide by Lahore Declaration


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD,  JAN.  30.  Without  naming  the  Lahore  Declaration, 
Pakistan  has  said  that it is  ``prepared  to  implement''  the 
February 1999 Pakistan-India agreement pledging the two countries 
to   the  intensification  of  efforts  for  the  resolution   of 
outstanding issues, including Kashmir. 

This  is, possibly, the first time that Pakistan, in an  official 
formulation,  has  acknowledged that the military  Government  of 
General Pervez Musharraf is committed to the Lahore Declaration. 

In  a  letter to the United Nations Secretary-General,  Mr.  Kofi 
Annan, the Pakistani Foreign Minister, Mr. Abdul Sattar, however, 
claimed that India seemed ``intent on avoiding fulfilment of  the 
(Lahore)  agreement. That obviously falsified  Indian  propaganda 
blaming Pakistan for the present hiatus in bilateral talks.'' 

The  contents of the letter are in sharp contrast to the  remarks 
made  by Mr. Sattar at his first press conference on November  8, 
1999,  after taking over as Foreign Minister. ``There are  scores 
of agreements between Pakistan and India. The Lahore agreement of 
February  1999 was one of them. We will scour that agreement  for 
positive aspects and we'll be prepared to implement them.'' 

Mr.  Sattar, quoted by the official APP news agency as saying  in 
his  letter  that Pakistan was also prepared to comply  with  the 
U.N.  Resolution  No.  1172  of June 6,  1998,  argued  that  the 
centrality  of  the Kashmir issue was obvious  in  India-Pakistan 
relations. 

``Any  attempt to sideline this core issue would be  an  ostrich-
like  response  of burying one's head in the sand,''  the  letter 
said. 

Mr.  Sattar said both India and Pakistan should welcome  any  and 
every    means   of   peacefully   resolving   their    disputes. 
``Negotiations are obviously the first but not the only means. If 
they  prove sterile, as has been the experience between  Pakistan 
and  India,  then  the  other  civilised  means  evolved  by  the 
community  of  states  should be availed of in  the  interest  of 
peace,'' the letter said. 

Mr.  Sattar  was also quoted as saying that a final  decision  on 
whether or not the U.S. President, Mr. Bill Clinton, would  visit 
Pakistan was expected in a week or two. The U.S., he said,  could 
also  be proud of the role it played in defusing  crises  between 
India and Pakistan in 1990 and 1999. However, that record  needed 
to  be built upon. ``Crisis prevention is important in  a  region 
with  nuclear  capabilities but conflict resolution is  the  pre-
requisite  for  establishment  of  durable  peace,''  Mr.  Sattar  
argued. 
