
'Gujarat notification on RSS will stay'


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  30.  The Gujarat Home Minister,  Mr.  Haren  V. 
Pandya,   has  ruled  out  the  possibility  of  his   Government 
withdrawing  the controversial circular permitting  employees  to 
participate in the activities of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. 

Defending  the  circular, the Minister said  the  Government  had 
neither  made it mandatory for its staff to take part in the  RSS 
activities  nor  invited  them to join the  organisation  as  the 
Congress(I)  was  making it out to be. It had merely  given  them 
freedom to participate in the work of a social organisation.

At a press conference here on Sunday, Mr. Pandya denied that  the 
Government  was playing the communal card. Several other  outfits 
including  the Vishwa Hindu Parishad, Hindu Mahasabha  and  Anand 
Marg along with the Jamaat-e-Islami Hind and the  Tameer-e-Millat 
remained  on  the Government's list of banned  organisations,  he 
pointed out.

He said the Congress(I) Government in 1986 banned 32 outfits  and 
included  the  RSS  in the list though the  Sangh  was  a  social 
organisation engaged in character-building and promoting national 
spirit. The decision was not only well thought out but based on a 
communication from the Centre that the RSS was not in the list of 
banned  organisations  following  a  judgment  of  the   Unlawful 
Activities Prevention Tribunal.

He said the Congress(I) regime had not included the Seva Dal  and 
the NSUI in the list of banned organisations while targeting  the 
RSS though it was not a political outfit. The Congress(I) leaders 
were raising a hue and cry nearly a fortnight after the  circular 
was issued exposing their political bankruptcy.

Gujarat  had witnessed a 7.6 per cent decline in  violent  crimes 
due to the implementation of the Police Action Plan. Crimes  such 
as murder, rioting, kidnapping, dacoity had come down from 48,057 
in 1998 to 44,232 last year.

Activities  of  Pakistan's  ISI had also been  kept  under  check 
through a special department for border security and a three-tier 
security system.

Mr.  Pandya met his Andhra Pradesh counterpart, Mr.  T.  Devender 
Goud, and the Union Minister of State for Urban Development,  Mr. 
B. Dattatreya, besides visiting the HI-TEC City and the  National 
Police Academy.
