
Unfazed Mehta launches movie


VARANASI,  JAN. 30. About 500 people led by local leaders of  the 
BJP  and  some  outfits owing allegiance  to  the  Sangh  Parivar 
ransacked  the  sets of Ms. Deepa Mehta's film `Water'  at  Tulsi 
Ghat  here this morning and threw the material in the Ganga.  The 
protesters  came  to the spot in a procession,  raising  slogans. 
However Ms. Deepa Mehta said she would continue shooting. 

Filmmaker Ms. Deepa Mehta performed the ``mahurat'' of her latest 
Hindi  movie  `Water'  at a hotel here today even  as  the  Uttar 
Pradesh Government denied her permission for shooting and various 
organisations staged protests against her film.

Deepa huddled the cast in a room at a city hotel and launched the 
movie with symbolic pooja.

Shabana  Azmi,  Nandita Das and eight-year-old Urvi  Gokani,  who 
enact  the role of widows in the film depicting the  relationship 
between  a  Gandhian  idealist and a widow  in  the  backdrop  of 
Varanasi in 1930, were present at the ceremony.

Describing  the protests as ``heart-breaking'', Deepa Mehta  said 
the Information and Broadcasting Ministry had cleared the  script 
without  any  cut  and a liaison officer  was  appointed  by  the 
Ministry  to monitor the shooting. ``But suddenly, yesterday  the 
liaison  officer, Krishna Murari sought the Hindi script  of  the 
movie  and  said he needed a fortnight to study it'',  she  said, 
adding  ``before  a book is published, somebody  is  writing  the 
review''.

Police  protection  has been given to the director and  the  main 
stars of the movie and security beefed up around the hotel  where 
the unit is camping.

Workers  of  the BJP and several women and  social  organisations 
today took out a procession under the leadership of the local BJP 
MLA,  Mr.  Shyam  Deo Roy Chowdhari, and  the  party's  all-India 
secretary, Mrs. Jyotsana Srivastava, in protest against the film.

After ransacking the set erected at Tulsi Ghat on the bank of the 
Ganga  the  protesters also tried to enter a building  where  the 
indoor set was located but it had been locked from inside by  the 
film crew. Protesters carried away whatever they could lay  their 
hands on and set them on fire.

According to the police, no person of the film unit was  attacked 
or injured.

A  public meeting was held under the banner of ``Kashi  Sanskriti 
Raksha Sangharsh Samiti'' action committee to ``save the  culture 
of  Kashi''  in which speakers accused Deepa Mehta of  trying  to 
portray  the  cultural and social life of this holy city  in  bad  
light. The Uttar Pradesh Government has reportedly disallowed the 
shooting of the film.

The  Uttar Pradesh Government today referred to  the  Information 
and  Broadcasting  Ministry  a report of  the  Varanasi  district 
administration that the shooting of the film was likely to ``hurt 
people's feelings'' besides creating ``law and order  problems'', 
the Principal Secretary (Home), Mr. V. K. Mittal, told  reporters 
here.  He  however,  denied reports that a group  today  made  an 
attempt to damage the sets of the film.

The  Government  yesterday  asked Ms. Deepa Mehta  not  to  start 
shooting without obtaining its permission. 

* * *

Film shooting stopped

Following violent demonstrations on the sets of Ms. Deepa Mehta's 
film  `Water'  here  this morning,  the  district  administration 
tonight  stopped the shooting of the movie on the orders  of  the 
Uttar Pradesh Government. 

The District Magistrate, Mr. Aloke Kumar, in a press release said 
the  district  administration had informed the  State  Government 
about  the  sentiments of the people of  Varanasi  regarding  the 
film. 

Following instructions from Lucknow, the district  administration 
had  intimated  Ms.  Mehta that shooting of  the  film  had  been 
disallowed till further orders, he said. 

- PTI, UNI
