
Britain's &#163;10,000 bond for Asians dubbed discriminatory


LONDON, JAN. 30. Visitors to Britain from the Indian subcontinent 
will have to put up a  &#163;10,000 bond if immigration officials 
suspect that they intend to settle illegally.

The  bond  will  not be returned by the Home  Office  unless  the 
visitor  leaves on or before their departure date. Should  he  or 
she fail to leave, the money will be forfeited.

The  Home  Office  says  that  only  under  exceptional   medical 
circumstances  would  the cash be returned if  someone  outstayed 
their  visa validity. Ministers believe the project is  vital  to 
stop  bogus visitors coming to Britain with the intention of  not 
returning home.

Mr.  Jeremy  Corbyn,  the ruling Labour  Party  MP  for  London's 
Islington  North area, described the scheme  as  ``discriminatory 
and possibly illegal'' under race relations laws. ``I think a lot 
of Labour MPs will be very concerned about this.''

Mr.  Ashok  Kumar,  the Labour MP  for  Middlesbrough  South  and 
Cleveland  East in north-east England, said: ``I can see no  harm 
in  launching  a pilot scheme but we will have  to  evaluate  the 
results very carefully before adopting this.''

Mr. Ashika Thanki of the Newham Monitoring Project, a campaigning 
organisation  for  ethnic  minorities in London,  said:  ``It  is 
noticeable that the Home Office are proposing to run this project 
on  the  Asian subcontinent, not in Australia.  There  is  little 
doubt  this  will be discriminatory. For a start it  will  target 
poor people, because their families will not be able to find  the 
money to put up the bond.'' 

The  Home  Office dismissed this claim,  saying  only  relatively 
wealthy  people could afford the cost of travel and that  if  the 
bond  was seen to be insignificant it could be viewed  simply  as 
the price to be paid for securing entry to the U.K.

``The prospective loss of the bond money must be a real incentive 
to  the  sponsor  to  encourage  the  visitor  to  abide  by  his 
immigration conditions,'' said a spokesperson.

Officials  believe it would be ``sensible'' to  initially  locate 
the  project at two visa issuing posts in either India,  Pakistan 
or  Bangladesh. If successful, the scheme would then be  expanded 
to cover other countries.

Britain  is  determined to be seen to be  taking  action  against 
illegal  immigrants,  especially after latest  figures  showed  a 
record  number  of new asylum seekers. 

- Telegraph Group Ltd., London, 2000 
