
Laloo to file papers in Raghopur today


By Our Staff Correspondent

PATNA,  JAN. 30. The RJD president, Mr. Laloo Prasad  Yadav,  has 
decided  to  file his nomination papers  from  Raghopur  Assembly 
constituency tomorrow.

And  with  that Mr. Yadav would be contesting from  two  Assembly 
constituencies as in the 1995 Assembly elections. He has  already 
filed  his papers from Danapur constituency. The RJD has  so  far 
released  its  list  of candidates for the first  two  phases  of 
elections and once the third list is out it would be clear if Mr. 
Yadav  would  be sticking to these two constituencies  this  time 
too.

Mr. Yadav had been returned from both these constituencies in the 
last Assembly elections but he retained Raghopur as the margin of 
victory was bigger. He resigned Raghopur too when he was  elected 
to the Lok Sabha from Madhepura in 1998.

The RJD spokesperson, Mr. Shivanand Tiwari, who released the list 
would  himself be contesting from Shahpur instead of Piero  which 
he  now  represents. He had won the seat in a byelection  on  the 
Samata  Party  ticket. He is the only Brahmin  candidate  in  the 
RJD's second list of 94 nominees.

The party is contesting 97 of the 108 seats going to the polls in 
the  second phase leaving eight for the CPI(M) and three for  the 
SJP of the former Prime Minister, Mr. Chandra Shekhar. The  party 
has kept in abeyance the names of three of its nominees which  it 
is likely to finalise before the expiry of deadline for filing of 
nomination papers tomorrow.

The  party today denied the ticket to three Ministers,  including 
the  Cabinet Minister, Mr. Basant Singh, who after resigning  his 
post,  has filed his papers as an independent candidate, and  two 
legislators.  The party has not taken a decision on the  Minister 
of  State  for  Welfare,  Mrs. Sita Devi,  and  postponed  it  to 
tomorrow.

The  party has given the ticket to the Koeri Leader, Mr.  Shakuni 
Chaudhary, who would be contesting from the Tarapur constituency, 
now represented by his wife. The RJD has once again earmarked the 
lions  share of ticket to the Yadav community (35),  followed  by 
Dalits  and  Rajputs  with 12 each, Muslims 10,  Koeris  and  the 
economically  backward castes seven each, the tribals and  Kurmis 
get  three each, while the Banias and the upper  caste  Bhumihars 
were  given two ticket each. There is only one Brahmin  candidate 
in the list.
