
Bollywood gives officials a piece of its mind


By Mahesh Vijapurkar

MUMBAI, JAN. 30. Disquiet amongst the leading lights of Bollywood 
-  Mumbai's  masala-laced Hindi filmdom -  has  resurfaced  again 
after  two years on the vulnerability of their trade  to  threats 
from  the  underworld and its consequences, as evidenced  by  the 
abortive bid on Mr. Rakesh Roshan's life here recently. And  they 
are not keeping quite about it either.

It  was  precisely to cope with this kind of situation  that  the 
previous  Shiv  Sena-BJP  Government  had  first  promulgated  an 
ordinance  and  then  enacted a  law,  ``Maharashtra  Control  of 
Organised  Crime Act''. But it seems to have done little to  make 
the film world feel secure. But the police insist that  extortion 
has statistically dipped.

Eminent film personalities expressed their fears last night at  a 
specially  convened  meeting.  The  BJP  MP,  Mr.  Vinod   Khanna 
participated.  The Maharashtra Deputy Chief Minister, Mr.  Chagan 
Bhujbal,  led  the Government side comprising top  Home  Ministry 
officials and the DGP, Mr. Subhash Malhotra.

If Mr. Bhujbal sought cooperation from the film personalities  to 
enable  the  Government  to nail  underworld  extortionists,  the 
celluloid  industry  made it clear that it was  feeling  insecure 
since the attempt on Mr. Roshan's wife was not an isolated one. A 
feeling  that  not enough was being done to check the  trend  was 
palpable at the meeting.

Mr.  Bhujbal  had raised a stink when such incidents  took  place 
during  the Sena-BJP rule for four and half a years, and  it  was 
his turn fending brickbats at the meeting.

If   Mr.  Bhujbal  promised  every  step  to  protect  the   film 
personalities  - often high profile and easy targets,  even  soft 
ones - in return, he wanted them to fully cooperate and speak  to 
the  police, if necessary through their friends if not  directly. 
This  was on the correct premise that the victim is aware of  the 
origin of the threat.

Mr.  Roshan, it is learnt, had received some threats and  demands 
from  Chota Shakeel, an underworld don with a massive network  in 
the  city from his operators based in Karachi and even Dubai.  It 
is not known if he had made available this information before the 
attack,   which  he  survived,  but  later,  in  an   unconnected 
development, he underwent a cardiac surgery.From what sources  at 
the  meeting  said,  it  is possible  that  the  two  sides,  the 
protectors  and  the film-makers, gave vent  to  their  feelings, 
sometimes quite accusatory of the other. Mr. Manmohan Shetty, who 
runs a film laboratory, is said to have alleged that he had given 
the  telephone numbers of his persecutors but the police had  not  
acted.

The meeting was attended by Mr. Roshan's father-in-law, Mr. J. Om 
Prakash,  himself  a  film producer of some  renown,  Mr.  Pahlaj 
Nihlani,  president  of  the Association  of  Motion  Pictures  & 
Television Producers, Mr. Ramesh Deo, Mr. Amit Khanna, Mr. Amrish 
Puri,  Mr.  B. R. Chopra, Mr. Shetty, Mr. Shakti  Samantha,  Mrs. 
Asha Parekh and a host of others.

PTI reports:

A high-level co-ordination committee, comprising  representatives 
from  the  industry  and  top  officials  from  police  and  home 
departments,  would  be set up soon to deal  with  the  extortion 
menace.

`The  names of the committee members will be announced  soon  and 
they  will  meet  on a regular basis to  review  the  situation', 
according  to Mr. Amit Khanna, spokesman of the  film  delegation 
that attended the meeting.
