
Sonia takes to the streets


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW DELHI, JAN. 30. The Congress(I) president, Ms. Sonia Gandhi's 
breezy debut in street protest here this morning had the party on 
its toes with party managers sacrificing their Sunday - first  to 
give  her  moral  support  as she courted  arrest,  and  then  to 
highlight what, for them, was clearly a big event.  

Five  thousand  party  activists, among whom  were  a  number  of 
marquee names, accompanied Ms. Gandhi from the AICC  headquarters 
as she set out for the Prime Minister's residence to give Mr.  A. 
B.  Vajapayee  a memorandum protesting the  Gujarat  Government's 
order  allowing its employees to participate in  RSS  activities. 
And  when the police intercepted her, less than a kilometre  away 
from the Prime Minister's residence, they cheered her and courted 
arrest along with her.

It was her big moment - this was the first time she was taking on 
the police as an Opposition leader - and the party wanted to make 
sure  that nobody missed it. Mr. Ajit Jogi, who was part  of  Ms. 
Gandhi's ``court arrest'' entourage, was barely out of the police 
station   that  the  call  of  duty  brought  him  to  the   AICC 
headquarters again - this time to prepare a brief for the Press.

Generally,  four o'clock on a Sunday is siesta time at 24,  Akbar 
Road but this Sunday it was all perked up; and Mr. Jogi,  looking 
cheerful  as  ever but extremely apologetic, was ready  with  the 
news:  details of Ms. Gandhi's journey to the police  station;  a 
list  of  ``prominent Congressmen'' who had courted  arrest  with 
her;  an overview of her activity in Sabarmati where she had,  by 
then,  arrived to protest some more (``we are told that  a  large 
crowd  has  turned  up to hear her'') and  the  party's  plan  to 
continue  with  the agitation until the  controversial  order  is 
withdrawn.  And  to  clear  any  possible  misunderstanding,   he 
explained  that  the  reason why the Deputy Speaker,  Mr.  P.  M. 
Sayeed,  and the Delhi Chief Minister, Ms. Shiela Dixit, did  not 
join  Ms.  Gandhi was because the protocol  prevented  them.  Mr. 
Sayeed's  office followed it up with a press  release  explaining 
the ``constraints'' which came in the way of his courting arrest. 
Mr.  Jogi  reiterated  his  party's  criticism  of  the   Gujarat 
Government's  decision  saying it was against  the  principle  of 
``neutrality''  of civil servants. It was also an  indication  of 
the  ``shape of things to come'' if the BJP came to power at  the 
Centre on its own strength. ``Those of its allies in the National 
Democratic Alliance who pay lip service to secularism should take 
heed,'' Mr. Jogi warned.

And,  as  for the Congress(I), it would not rest  until  the  BJP 
Government in Gujarat was brought to its knees. But this was  not 
the occasion to disclose the details of its future campaign. 
