
Militants trigger panic in Jammu


By Shujaat Bukhari

JAMMU, JAN. 30. Following a series of attacks on Republic Day and 
later,  Jammu  is in the grip of fear as  reports  on  militants' 
presence continue to pour in. Authorities admit that Jammu is now 
the target as Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence has  planned 
to  expand  its network Police had recovered a number  of  solar-
ignited rockets from militants meant to disrupt the Republic Day. 
Security  was beefed up, yet the militants fired at  least  eight 
rockets of which four were directed at the MAM Stadium, venue  of 
R-Day  parade. All the four missed the target and landed in  Tawi 
islands. Much earlier, two militants, who police claim were  part 
of the ``fidayeen'' (suicide squad) of the Pan-Islamic Lashkar-e-
Taiba  were killed after they escaped from police  custody.  They 
had  fled from the Panama Chowk near the railway station  leaving 
behind arms and ammunition.

The R-day attack was followed by another on the house of National 
Conference MLC, Mr. Javed Hussain Shah in Roop Nagar. He  himself 
was  the  commander of the pro-Pakistan Al  Jehad  outfit  before 
switching  loyalties to the security forces. A number  of  rounds 
were  exchanged by his guards with the militants who first  threw 
grenades. Even as police highups are not clear about the identity 
of  the  attackers, the incident triggered panic in  Roop  Nagar, 
where  Kashmiri  pandits  who  migrated  from  the  valley  live. 
``Throughout  the  night we were wailing and  weeping,''  said  a 
Kashmiri  Pandit  resident  adding ``where can we  go  from  here 
now''?  Holding  the Government responsible  for  the  militants' 
entry, the Pandits are worried over their shattered future.

The  next  day dawned with an alarming  message.  The  Government 
quarters colony at Company Bagh in the heart of city reverberated 
to  a  powerful  bomb  blast. Though no human  life  was  lost  a 
majority of Kashmiri Muslim officials who reside there were taken 
aback. This will invite the wrath of the police and the  security 
forces  on them and they would be viewed with suspicion,  said  a 
Muslim official working in the Civil Secretariat.

Reports  of  militants' presence in various localities  of  Jammu 
continue  to pour in. A few days ago a report on the presence  of 
two  Afghan militants on the outskirts of Gool Gujral  was  being 
discussed everywhere. Eyewitness said the two had their meal at a 
Kashmiri  Pandit's  house. Mr. Radhavinod Raju, IG,  Jammu  Zone, 
said, ``We also heard about that but it was not confirmed''.  He, 
however,  said that at least five militants had been arrested  in 
Jammu city in the last three days. ``We are expecting to get some 
vital  clues about militant plans here'', he told  TheHindu.  Mr. 
Raju  said that Jammu was the target but ``we are  also  devising 
our plans accordingly''.

The  entry of militants into Jammu worries the authorities  most.  
The  Government  already  facing a tough time  in  valley,  Doda, 
Rajouri  and Poonch is finding it difficult to cope up  with  the 
situation. A senior security official said that after Kargil  the 
situation  had deteriorated with the withdrawal of  the  security 
forces.  ``We  are  facing a shortage of forces  but  the  latest 
strategy  under which the State has been divided into 49  sectors 
will help in overcoming these problems'', he added.
