
Current account deficit may be under control


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 30. Despite a slow down in the  inflow  of  net 
invisibles  in  the  current fiscal  year,  the  current  account 
deficit  (CAD) is expected to be within acceptable limits of  1.5 
to 2.0 per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP).

In fact, the Investment and Credit Rating Agency (ICRA) estimates 
that  the CAD might actually be lower than the 1.5 per cent  mark 
even.  An analysis by ICRA has shown that net invisible  earnings 
in  the  first half of 1999-2000 were placed at  $  4.1  billion, 
which  was lower than the $ 5.1 billion inflow in the first  half 
of  last year. The expansion in net invisible earnings  over  the 
last few years had helped in financing the expanded trade deficit 
till  1996-97,  thus  keeping the current  account  deficit  well 
within  the perceived safety belt of around 1.5 per cent  of  the 
GDP. 

According  to  ICRA, the erosion of growth in the  net  invisible 
earnings was a matter of both concern and some puzzle, given that 
the expected outcome from the reported growth of software exports 
would have been the opposite. 

However, the CAD for the first half of the current fiscal year at 
$  3.5 billion is about the same as $ 3.1 billion during  1998-99 
first half.

But last year, a combination of weakening of oil prices, slumping 
non-oil  imports  and  especially a recovery in  exports  in  the 
fourth  quarter had resulted in a curtailment of the  balance  of 
payments  trade  deficit  for the second half  by  $  3  billion, 
relative  to  the  first  half,  the  ICRA  analysis  has  shown. 
Consequently, despite a weaker showing in net invisible earnings, 
the  second  half of 1998-99 closed with a CAD of a  mere  $  0.9 
billion. 

In  the current year, export growth in October and November  have 
been  strong, while imports have not  responded  proportionately. 
Therefore,  ICRA  economists feel that the trade deficit  in  the 
second half of this year too may be pruned somewhat.
