
Nation pays homage to the Mahatma


NEW  DELHI, JAN. 30. The President, Mr. K.R. Narayanan,  led  the 
nation  in paying homage to the `father of the  nation',  Mahatma 
Gandhi, on the 52nd anniversary of his martyrdom here today.  Mr. 
Narayanan  placed  a wreath and offered floral  tributes  at  the 
Mahatma  Gandhi  samadhi at Rajghat on the banks of  the  Yamuna, 
where  he was cremated after falling to an assassin's  bullet  on 
January 30, 1948. 

The Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee, was among the early 
visitors  to  pay respects at the samadhi followed by  the  Vice-
President,  Mr. Krishan Kant and his wife, Mrs. Suman. The  Union 
Home  Minister,  Mr. L.K. Advani, the Youth  and  Sports  Affairs 
Minister,  Mr.  Ananth Kumar and Mahatma Gandhi's  grandson,  Mr. 
Gopal Gandhi, were among those present on the occasion. 

An  inter-religious prayer meeting was organised. The  hour-long 
function, held amid tight security, concluded with the singing of 
Gandhiji's  favourite  devotional songs, `Vaishnava  Janato'  and 
`Ram  Dhun'  by the vocalist, Mr. Pramod Mudgal.  The  President, 
Vice-President  and  Prime  Minister later  attended  a  memorial 
service  at  Rajghat and offered floral  tributes  at  Gandhiji's 
samadhi. 

The  Defence Minister, Mr. George Fernandes, the Deputy  Chairman 
of the Planning Commission, Mr. K.C. Pant, the Minister of  State 
for  Defence, Mr. Harin Pathak, the Army Chief, Gen. V.P.  Malik, 
the  Air Chief A.Y. Tipnis and the Chief of Naval Staff,  Admiral 
Sushil Kumar, were present. A gun salute was offered as a mark of 
respect to the father of the nation. 

Later,  the  President unveiled the plaque of  the  International 
Centre  for  Gandhian Studies and Research,  being  developed  at 
Gandhi Darshan in Rajghat. The Prime Minister, the Home Minister, 
Mr. L.K. Advani and the Culture Minister, Mr. Ananth Kumar,  were 
among the dignitaries present. 

Mr. Narayanan also inaugurated an exhibition ``25 years of Gandhi 
Smriti'' which depicts the various activities carried out by  the 
Gandhi  Smriti  and  the Darshan  Samiti.  Students  of  Sanskrit 
Mahavidyala  presented  a  programme  of  veda  mantras  on   the 
occasion. 

- PTI, UNI 
