
18 killed in road mishap in Punjab 


By Our Staff Correspondent

CHANDIGARH, JAN.30 In a freak accident, a truck laden with  sugar 
bags overturned on the opposite lane of the National Highway No.1 
crushing  18  people  travelling  in  two  vehicles.  The  mishap 
occurred  this  morning near Mehandipur village 10 km  away  from 
Khanna town towards Ludhiana city.

The deceased include seven men, an equal number of woman and four 
children.  According to the police, the relatives had  identified 
at least 16 bodies. The driver of the killer truck, who has  been 
identified  as  Anil Kumar and his  assistant,  have   absconded, 
while a case was registered.

According  to reports reaching here the sugar-laden  truck,  with 
the  registration  number, URM 1156,  suddenly  overturned  after 
jumping over the meridian and fell on two vehicles travelling  in 
the opposite lane. It crushed a Tata Sumo carrying 16  passengers 
and Maruti Zen, in which a couple was travelling. Witnesses  said 
that the faces of some bodies had been badly mutilated.

According  to preliminary inquiries by the police, the driver  of 
the  sugar-laden  truck,  which  was  heading  towards  Ludhiana, 
apparently  attempted to save himself from another  truck,  which 
had  been laden with iron rods and parked on the road,  since  it 
broke down last night. It was not clear, whether he lost  control 
or  there was snag in the brakes, which forced him to  swerve  to 
the  wrong  side.  The police have arrested  the  driver  of  the 
stationary truck Jaspal Singh.

A  crane was rushed from Khanna and shortly top officers  of  the 
administration reached the spot. All efforts proved too late,  as 
most of the victims seemed to have died under the truck. Once the 
truck  was removed, it was found the both the vehicles  had  been 
reduced to mangled pieces. 

By afternoon the relatives of the 16 passengers in the Tata  Sumo 
reached the site and recognised the deceased. It was revealed the 
occupants  who  belonged to Talwandi Malhan  village  of  Patiala 
district  were returning after performing a ceremony  related  to 
the marriage of a close relative in Vinjola village of Kapurthala 
district. According to some documents recovered from the vehicle, 
the  driver of the Maruti Zen appeared to be an employee  of  the 
Phagwara  branch Punjab National Bank. The Tata Sumo and the  Zen 
car  bore  registration plates of  PB-11H-8685  and  PB-36A-3185, 
respectively.
