
Three-pronged strategy to combat insurgency in Kashmir


By Atul Aneja

NEW DELHI, JAN. 30. The Government has decided to adopt a  three-
pronged strategy to combat insurgency in Kashmir, based on larger 
force mobilisation and pro-active deployment. 

Highly  placed  sources said that a decision had  been  taken  to 
increase the force level, especially in the Rajouri, Punch, Nangi 
Tekri, and Sudarbani areas, south of the Pir Panjal ranges. Fresh 
induction, mainly in the 16 corps area, was partly due to stepped 
up  infiltration  in  the  area. It  was  also  anticipated  that 
Pakistan may seek more engagements with the Indian forces in this 
area. 

But more troops may be required in some other areas in Jammu  and 
Kashmir.  For instance, a strengthened counter- insurgency  grid, 
now  being  set in place, requires additional deployment  of  the 
Army and para-military forces. 

Besides,  the ``imbalance'' caused in the force level,  owing  to 
larger  post-Kargil deployment along the Line of  Control  (LoC), 
resulting in the presence of fewer troops in the insurgent  zones 
in the valley and the Doda area is yet to be ``corrected'' fully. 

The force level apart, the Government has decided to adopt a pro-
active  posture  in the counter-insurgency drive.  As  a  result, 
troops  are  being encouraged to seize the  initiative  and  push 
militants to the defensive. ``Encounter seeking'' which  includes 
chasing  and engaging cross- border militants in areas  including 
the border zone is likely to be given emphasis. 

Security planners feel that in the post-Kargil scenario there  is 
no  option  but to harden the stance against  those  who  provide 
sanctuaries to cross-border insurgents, offer their dwellings  to 
them  for  storing weapons or play the role  of  couriers  during 
insurgency. 

Analysts  cite the scaled up cross-border militancy in the  Jammu 
and Kashmir as the cause for the Government's muscular  response. 
The security establishment, for instance, has found the raids  on 
army  camps by the ``fedayeen '' or the suicide squads  belonging 
to  the  Pakistan  based Harkat-Ul-Mujahideen  or  the  Lashkar-e 
-Taiba,  as completely unacceptable. The official mood  has  been 
further hardened by the recent hijacking incident. 

All  this comes in the backdrop of a changed  threat  perception, 
vis-a-vis  the internal security situation in Jammu  and  Kashmir 
where  an estimated 300 hard-core insurgents have infiltrated  in 
this area in the recent months. 

While  the Government has decided to alter the balance of  forces  
in  its  favour in the current round of the  counter-  insurgency 
campaign, its response to insurgency is being constrained by  two 
key factors. 

There  is  a  clear perception here  that  an  intensified  drive 
against externally aided militancy should not result in a  larger 
conflict  between India and Pakistan. Besides,  official  circles 
are  clear  that  the application of force should  be  such  that 
Islamabad  is  prevented  from making political  capital  out  of 
``human  rights violations'' in order to blunt the  new  counter- 
insurgency thrust.
