
'Pak. has planned another Kargil-type offensive'


NEW  DELHI, JAN. 30. The Pakistan Army has reportedly  planned  a 
major Kargil-type offensive in the coming months aimed at cutting 
off  large  formations  of Indian forces in  Jammu  and  Kashmir, 
according to a former aide to a top Taliban commander.

The  Pakistani  military  planners have  directed  big  mercenary 
groups to attempt to cut off the Jammu-Srinagar and  Jammu-Poonch 
highways  in  a bid to isolate troops stationed on  the  Line  of 
Control  (LoC).  They have asked large groups of  mercenaries  to 
concentrate  on the lightly-held heights of the Pir Panjal  range 
straddling the two highways. 

A  former  close aide of a top Taliban  commander,  Maulvi  Abdul 
Rasul Rab Sayyaf, who recently left Afghanistan for sanctuary  in 
the  West,  said  preparations  and  plotting  of  the   proposed 
offensive   were   undertaken   by   Pakistan's    Inter-Services 
Intelligence  (ISI)  commanders at  the  Harkat-ul-Mujahiddin-run 
Khawar Zilli camps in the Khost province of Afghanistan recently.

``The  ISI  has,  or may be is, in the  process  of  infiltrating 
regular  Pakistani  soldiers in mufti to lead  and  direct  these 
operations and Pakistani military planners might raise the  stake 
by arming mercenaries with light artillery guns and 84- and  120-
mm  mortars  for the offensive,'' the Taliban aide  said  on  the 
condition of anonymity. 

A  self-styled  commander-in-chief of a major  Kashmiri  militant 
group,  the  Hizbul Mujahiddin, Syed  Salhuddin  alias  Mohammaed 
Yusuf,  who  is  now housed  in  the  Pakistan-occupied-  Kashmir 
capital  of  Muzzaffarbad  by the ISI,  was  recently  quoted  by 
Pakistani  papers  as threatening that mercenary  groups  on  the 
Kargil  pattern  were ready to launch major attacks  to  cut  off 
Indian border troops from their rear bases. 

Harkat preparations

According  to military strategists here, Pakistan's aim could  be 
to  attempt  to bring the two national highways  under  artillery 
threat,  making  the  movement  of  vehicles  difficult  if   not 
impossible.  While  the big mercenary groups have  been  told  to 
occupy  vital heights straddling the two highways, the  Pakistani 
military  planners are plotting to pin down border troops on  the 
LoC by heavy engagement from across the LoC.

The  Afghan  aide  said  a large number  of  Harkat  and  Lashkar 
mercenaries,  who infiltrated into Jammu and Kashmir  during  the 
Kargil  conflict, had been directed to build huge  mountain  cave 
defences on the mountain heights overlooking the two highways  to 
locate heavy mortars and light artillery guns.

He said the Harkat camps at Khost were shared with the group  led  
by the Saudi terrorist, Osama bin Laden, who might have  imparted 
the  expertise in building mountain cave defences to  the  Harkat 
group.  During  the Afghan campaign against the  Russian  forces, 
Osama  was acknowledged for expertise in building  mountain  cave 
defence and ammunition dumps. 

The Afghan aide said the ISI had summoned major commanders of the 
Harkat-Ul-Mujahiddin,  Lashkar-e-Taiba and Al Badr groups to  the 
Khost conclave to finalise the offensive.

Azhar's move

The  new drive by the freed top Harkat commander,  Maulvi  Masood 
Azhar,  to  form  a unified mercenary group under  the  label  of 
Lashkar-e-Muhammadi,  according to reports here, is part  of  the 
efforts to coordinate among the groups.

The aide said according to ISI directions, the fidayeen (suicide) 
groups  of  the  Lashkar had been asked to keep  Army  and  para-
military  formations pinned down by launching suicide attacks  on 
formation headquarters.

``Such  attacks  in coming weeks would become more  intense  with 
even  civilian leaders and establishments being  targeted,''  the 
Taliban  aide  said.  He  said the  ISI  had  plotted  siting  of 
mountain-top  cave camps in the heights over the  Banihal,  Ramsu 
and the adjoining Gool Gulabgarh areas for an eventuality of  use 
in  case of an all-out war with India, but were now sought to  be 
brought  into  operation  to  focus  international  attention  on 
Kashmir, post- Kargil and hijacking. 

- PTI 
