
New round of West Asia talks begins


JERUSALEM,  JAN. 30. Israeli and Palestinian negotiators began  a 
new round of intensive peace talks near Jerusalem today, just two 
weeks  ahead of a target date for a framework accord on the  most 
sensitive issues dividing the two sides.

The  delegations for the negotiations, expected to last 10  days, 
were  led  by Israel's chief negotiator, Mr. Oded Eran,  and  his 
Palestinian counterpart, Mr. Yasser Abed Rabbo, the office of the 
Prime Minister, Mr. Ehud Barak, said.

Mr. Eran is due to accompany Mr. Barak on his visit to Egypt  for 
talks with the President, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, before returning  to 
rejoin the negotiations with the Palestinians.

Under   the  U.S.-brokered  Sharm  El-Sheikh  Accord  signed   in 
September,  the two sides set a February 13 deadline to  finalise 
an  outline  accord on the key outstanding issues  of  Jerusalem, 
Palestinian  refugees, borders and statehood, Jewish  settlements 
and  water-sharing  ahead  of  a  September  target  date  for  a 
permanent settlement.

But  both  sides  have cast doubt over  the  likelihood  of  them 
reaching a framework accord by February 13.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Barak denied claims from an anonymous  U.S. 
official that Mr. Barak will meet Mr. Arafat.

The  date  of  their next meeting has not yet  been  decided,  Ms 
Meirav Parsi-Tzadok said.

A   U.S.  official  at  the  World  Economic  Forum   in   Davos, 
Switzerland,  said  yesterday that Mr. Barak and Mr.  Arafat  had 
provisionally  scheduled  a meeting for Thursday or  Friday.  The 
meeting would take place at the Erez Crossing between Israel  and 
the  Gaza  Strip, the official, who asked not to  be  identified, 
said.

Unlike  Mr. Arafat, Mr. Barak did not attend the Davos  forum.  

- AFP

Russia to host meet

Reuters reports from Moscow:

Russia  will host the first multilateral West Asia talks in  more 
than  three  years  on Tuesday in a move  intended  to  underline 
Moscow's  push for a bigger role in the  strategically  important 
region.

The  Russian  Foreign  Minister, Mr. Igor Ivanov,  and  the  U.S.  
Secretary of State, Ms Madeleine Albright, will jointly chair the 
talks, which bring together representatives from Israel, a string 
of  Arab  states  and donor countries  including  Japan  and  the 
European Union.

The  talks,  held at the Foreign Minister level,  will  focus  on 
cross-border issues such as arms control, the environment, water, 
refugees and economic cooperation. But setbacks in Syrian-Israeli 
talks  and  very slow progress on the  Israeli-Palestinian  track 
have  clouded hopes that the one-day Moscow meeting will  achieve 
anything substantial.

Syria's  decision  to stay away from the  talks  has  underscored 
Moscow's  loss of influence over a key Soviet-era  ally.  Syria's 
client,  Lebanon, also plans to skip the meeting. Both  countries 
say  it  is  pointless to discuss  regional  cooperation  without 
making peace with Israel first.

Moscow  sent out its invitations earlier this month  just  before 
the recently resumed Syrian-Israeli talks were suspended.
