
Terrorism not the way: Gujral


By V.S.Sambandan

COLOMBO,  JAN. 30. Former Prime Minister, Mr. I.K. Gujral,  today 
termed  the  Indo-Sri  Lankan Free Trade  Agreement  (FTA)  as  a 
``technology  demonstrator'' which would foster greater  regional 
co-operation.

Inaugurating the Neelan Tiruchelvam Commemoration Programme,  the 
former   Prime   Minister  who  had   earlier   proposed   ``non-
reciprocity''  as  a guiding factor in  neighbourhood  relations, 
said the region ``is presently confronted with some  road-blocks, 
mind-sets, doubts and suspicions,'' and that the FTA ``will serve 
as a `technology demonstrator' illustrating to others the benefit 
of regional co-operation.''

The commemoration programme is being held in memory of Dr. Neelan 
Tiruchelvam, a senior leader of the Tamil United Liberation Front 
(TULF) and internationally renowned constitutional expert who was 
assassinated by a suicide-bomber, suspected to belong to the LTTE 
in Colombo last July. 

Defining  regional  co-operation as ``another  term  for  working 
towards the realisation of our collective self- interests,''  Mr. 
Gujral  said,  ``as  men  must  live  and  work  together  within 
democratic nations, so must we, as democracies, work in close and 
constructive   co-operation  within  our  region.  There  is   no 
choice.''

On  terrorism, he said that ``no political aim is justifiable  by 
the  means adopted by terrorists. That should be amply  clear  to 
anyone  whose  life  intersected with  Neelan's  in  any  manner. 
Narrowness  of a vision of what human societies ought  to  aspire 
for  and  of  the  ends  that  governance  should  serve  is  the 
philosophical  bed-fellow of those who glorify terror within  our 
countries  and,  equally  unfortunately,  across  them  as  well. 
Inclusiveness and civility would stand jeopardised in our  region 
and  in many parts of the world were we to countenance those  who 
seek to effect change through threats and wanton violence.''

On  the life and contributions of Dr. Neelan Tiruchelvam and  his 
``commitment  to the people of Sri Lanka- Sinhala, Tamil,  Muslim 
or Burgher,'' Mr. Gujral said: ``in his constitution, Neelan  had 
a place for everyone to live in dignity and freedom in one united 
harmony.'' Mr. Justice P.N.Bhagwati, former Chief Justice of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  India,  in his  opening  remarks,  said  that 
terrorism  was  the ``greatest enemy of human rights''  and  that 
``law  is  a powerful instrument for bringing  about  social  and 
human transformation.'' 

Prof.  K.M.De  Silva, Chairman, International Centre  for  Ethnic 
Studies,  said that the life of Dr. Tiruchelvam was an  ``example  
of an intellectual's effective contribution to politics.''

Messages  from  the U.N. Secretary General, Mr. Kofi  Annan,  the 
U.N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Mary  Robinson  and 
Myanmarese  leader, Ms. Aung Saung Su Kyi (PLS  CHECK  SPELLING), 
were read out on the occasion. 

A  two-day  workshop would commence tomorrow in which a  host  of 
international  delegates would deliberate on issues  relating  to 
human  rights,  diversity and  pluralism,  constitutionalism  and 
civil society.
