
Davos protests mirror Seattle scene 


DAVOS (SWITZERLAND), JAN. 30. About 500 demonstrators, apparently 
trying to mirror on a smaller scale the disturbances against  the 
World  Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle last November,  were 
on Saturday kept away from the hall where the U.S. President, Mr. 
Bill  Clinton,  spoke  at  the  World  Economic  Forum  here,  by 
phalanxes of heavily armed Swiss police officers.

But a group of demonstrators broke windows in a nearby McDonald's 
restaurant  that features a large statue of the  company's  icon, 
Ronald  McDonald,  and, according to witnesses,  injured  several 
policemen  even  as Mr. Clinton issued an impassioned  appeal  to 
make global trade work for the poor, too.

In what amounted to his gospel on globalisation, Mr. Clinton told 
an audience of chief executives and national leaders that if  the 
economic  elite  who  had created,  managed  and  benefited  from 
globalisation  did not listen to the concerns of those left  out, 
protectionism would return.

``This  is  a  new network,'' Mr. Clinton said,  speaking  to  an 
affluent  and  influential audience that  included  top  business 
executives but also the leaders of South Africa and Colombia, and 
the Palestinian leader, Mr. Yasser Arafat. ``But don't leave  the 
little  guys out.'' ``We have got to reaffirm unambiguously  that 
open markets and rules-based trade are the best engine we know to 
lift living standards, reduce environmental destruction and build 
shared  prosperity,'' he said. ``This is true whether  you're  in 
Detroit, Davos, Dhaka or Dakar.'' 

In  order  to  include the developing world in  the  benefits  of 
globalisation,  the  well-off have to make some  adjustments,  he 
said.

Mr.  Clinton's theme of incorporating the poor in the new  global 
economy received a mixed reception. The only applause during  his 
speech  was his reference to his State of the Union  proposal  to 
give tax benefits to companies that worked on vaccines for AIDS.

Afterward,  some  economists questioned whether Mr.  Clinton  was 
tempering  his enthusiasm for open markets too much. ``It  was  a 
balanced  speech, but he left unclear whether he wants to  impose 
our  social norms on the developing countries,'' said  Mr.  Horst 
Siebert,  head  of  the Kiel Institute of the  World  Economy  in 
Germany.  ``Nobody  wants  children  in  Bangladesh  working   in 
factories,  but  we should not be imposing our norms  on  them.'' 
Tinges   of   anti-Americanism  peppered  some   of   the   panel 
discussions.  At  one  panel,  a moderator  asked  for  a  ``non- 
American'' questioner. 

For  the  first, time nongovernmental organisations,  which  have 
expressed  concerns  about the effects of  globalisation  on  the  
developing world, were present at the Forum in some strength. Mr. 
Clinton did not refer to them directly, but repeatedly urged  his 
audience  to be inclusive rather than exclusive in  figuring  the 
rules  of free trade. Without backing away from concerns that  he 
insisted  be  covered by the world trade  talks  that  eventually 
collapsed  in Seattle in December, Mr. Clinton tried  to  address 
the unease in the developing world about his sincerity.

``I  know that the words `labour and environment' are heard  with 
suspicion in the developing world when they are uttered by people 
from  the developed world,'' he said. ``I understand  that  these 
words are code for rich-country protectionism.'' 

- New York Times
