
East Timor leaders for rights tribunal


By P. S. Suryanarayana

SINGAPORE,  JAN. 30. The leaders of East Timor have welcomed  the 
idea  of  setting up an international human rights  tribunal  for 
adjudicating  the alleged atrocities by some Indonesian  military 
personnel  in  that  territory  in  the  wake  of  its  vote  for 
independence  from  Jakarta's rule last year. Indonesia,  on  the 
other  hand,  has  opposed  the  constitution  of  any  kind   of 
international  tribunal  for  scrutinising  the  actions  of  its 
soldiers and military officers in East Timor.

The United Nations Secretary General, Mr. Kofi Annan, is expected 
to  unveil in New York tomorrow his views on the  recommendations 
of  a panel which he had set up to investigate the  circumstances 
in  which  the  carnage occurred in East Timor.  The  mayhem  was 
widely  blamed on the anti-independence militias among  the  East 
Timorese  themselves and their alleged allies in  the  Indonesian 
military  establishment (TNI). The carnage followed East  Timor's 
decisive rejection of autonomy as an Indonesian province.

The U.N. panel in question is widely believed to have recommended 
the formation of an international human rights tribunal. However, 
analysts  and observers argue that any such recommendation  might 
not  be approved by the U.N. Security Council, where one or  more 
permanent members may oppose the plan on the ground that it could 
only   destabilise  a  democratising  Indonesia.  The  U.S.   has 
indicated  a certain willingness to wait for some time  to  judge 
the internal process, now under way in Indonesia, to bring  those 
responsible for the alleged crimes in East Timor to book.

It  was in this context that the visiting East  Timorese  leader, 
Mr.  Jose Ramos-Horta, said in Singapore today that any  move  to 
constitute   a  U.N.-sponsored  tribunal  would   indeed   ``help 
consolidate  democracy  in Indonesia''. Mr. Ramos-Horta  and  the 
chief  independence  leader  of East Timor,  Mr.  Xanana  Gusmao, 
arrived in Singapore today in the course of their tour of several 
Asian  countries  to seek help for their territory being  run  at 
present by a U.N. Transitional Administration.

Noting  that  an international tribunal ``is necessary''  to  put 
East  Timor through its paces in every respect, Mr. Ramos-  Horta 
took care to preface his comment with the observation that it was 
for the first time he had heard of such a possibility and that it 
needed  to  be confirmed. Mr. Ramos-Horta said:  ``If  they  (the 
U.N.)  are  calling for (a) war crimes tribunal (in  relation  to 
East Timor), then it is a very important move.'' 
