
Power struggle on in Pak. army?


By Amit Baruah

ISLAMABAD,  JAN.  30  Is  a  power  struggle  on  in   Pakistan's 
military?. Yes, if recent reports in some U.S. newspapers are  to 
be  believed,  and  no  if  the  Chief  Executive,  Gen.   Pervez 
Musharraf, is to be believed. 

A report in The International Herald Tribune of January 27 (taken 
from The Washington Post) said: ``He (Gen. Musharraf) appears  to 
be  locked  in  a power struggle with  those  who  represent  the 
darkest  side  of the Pakistani regime, such as  General  Mahmoud 
Ahmed, director of Inter-Services Intelligence).'' 

The  International Herald Tribune, among other things, also  said 
that  Pakistan's ``notorious intelligence services are linked  to 
the   murderous  Osama  bin  Laden  gang  in   the   neighbouring 
Afghanistan.'' 

On  January  18, Mr. Selig.S.Harrison wrote in  The  Los  Angeles 
Times,  ``Islamabad's ruling junta is deeply divided between  its 
front man, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, and two more powerful  Generals 
with   long-standing   ties   to   the   Pakistan-based   Islamic 
fundamentalist  group  responsible for the  hijacking:  Lt.  Gen, 
Mohammed  Aziz, chief of the general staff, and Lt. Gen.  Mahmoud 
Ahmed, director of Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI.'' 

``The  danger that Aziz and Ahmed will elbow Musharraf  aside  is 
growing.  After the Army staged its coup, Musharraf demoted  Aziz 
to  a  corps  command,  but was forced to  back  down  when  Aziz 
resisted. 

Musharraf  is an Urdu-speaking refugee from India with no  ethnic 
base in Pakistan. Aziz speaks Punjabi, the language of Pakistan's 
dominant  Punjab province, and is a leader of the martial  Sudhan 
clan,  which  controls  the Poonch  district  of  the  Pakistani-
controlled half of Kashmir,'' Mr. Harrison said. 

``It  was  Aziz, with his roots in Kashmir and a long  record  of 
military  service  there, who masterminded the  invasion  of  the 
Kargil  area on the Indian side of the cease-fire line  early  in 
1999, triggering a dangerous confrontation with New Delhi. 

During and after the Afghan war, he directed the ISI's activities 
in  Afghanistan,  setting  up the training  camps  of  Harkat-ul-
Mujahideen,  the  group  responsible for the  hijacking  (of  the 
Indian Airlines aircraft),'' the report said. 
