
CPI rules out truck with CPI(M) in Khammam civic poll


By Our Staff Reporter

KHAMMAM,  JAN. 30. The CPI prefers forging a citizens' front  for 
fighting  the civic polls in Khammam instead of entering into  an 
electoral alliance with the CPI(M).

Addressing  a news conference here on Sunday, senior  leaders  of 
the  party,  including Mr. Puvvada Nageswara Rao  and  Mr.  Sidhi 
Venkateswarlu,  district secretary made it clear that  the  party 
had  no intention of playing into the hands of those who had  let 
down the party in the last elections.

They  stated  categorically that no adjustment  with  the  CPI(M) 
could  be  possible in the given situation and  its  election-eve 
requests  would not be entertained. Any effort to make the  cadre 
work  together against their wishes would be a  futile  exercise. 
The  CPI  would decide by February 5 its line  in  the  municipal 
elections in Khammam and the number of wards to be contested.

The CPI leaders said the party was keen on fighting the polls  by 
involving  people of the same wavelength from all walks  of  life 
instead  of  depending on people  from  ``unreliable  quarters.'' 
Educated  people including doctors, lecturers and  teachers  were 
coming  forward to fight the polls and the party would  make  its 
impact felt by encouraging them.

The CPI was deprived of its representation in the Assembly mainly 
because  of cross-voting by the CPI(M).They pointed out that  the 
CPI(M) did not respond positively to proposal for constituting  a 
three-member  committee with leaders from both the parties to  go 
into the charges of cross-voting and fix the responsibility.

Some  well-wishers  of both parties were keen on  a  state  level 
initiative to bring the communists together and solve the tangle. 
The CPI(M) could suggest the names of its choice for involving in 
such  an  exercise  in the interest of the movement.  If  such  a 
state-level   committee  wanted  the  two  parties  to  have   an 
understanding  in  Khammam  on  a valid  ground,  the  CPI  would 
certainly consider it, they said.
