
UGC scheme: Joshi backs State Govt. stance


By Our Special Correspondent

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, JAN. 30. In what amounts to an endorsement of 
the  Kerala Government's attempt to implement the UGC  scheme  in 
toto and a rap in the knuckle for the college teachers boycotting 
classes  on  Saturdays, the Union Human  Resource  Minister,  Dr. 
Murli  Manohar  Joshi, has said that college teachers  could  not 
hope to take salary and stay away from classes.

Replying to questions at a press conference here today, Dr. Joshi 
said  there could be no compromise on implementing essentials  of 
the  UGC scheme. He refused to join the controversy  over  having 
classes  in  colleges  on Saturdays,  but  said  teachers  should 
conform to the work schedule forming part of the UGC scheme.

The  Union Minister, however, came down heavily on the  ordinance 
issued  recently  by  the Kerala  Government  banning  unlicensed 
physical  training  by  any  organisation.  ``The  ordinance   is 
draconian  and  unconstitutional  and  prove  that  the   Marxist 
Government does not want its people to remain physically fit  and 
mentally alert,'' he said.

Returning to the controversy over the Centre's proposal to review 
the  Constitution,  he  said  there  was  no  rationale  for  the 
controversy  as the Constitution review committee was yet  to  be 
appointed.  Once  it  was  appointed  everybody  would  get   the 
opportunity  to put across their views on the subject. Dr. B.  R. 
Ambedkar himself had quoted Thomas Jefferson as having said  that 
``every new generation is a new nation and nobody is free to bind 
the new generation to their old views'', he added.

He   pointed   out   that   there   were   several   areas   like 
decentralisation  of powers to the states and the  anti-defection 
law  which needed to be examined carefully. ''Under  the  present 
law, if a person defects, he loses his membership (of  Parliament 
or  Assemblies),  but  if a group defects you have  a  new  Prime 
Minister,`` he quipped.

Referring  to the President's observation that it was the  people 
who  have failed the Constitution and not vice versa,  Dr.  Joshi 
said  the system had to be so designed as to ensure that even  if 
there  was  human failure it did not affect the system.  He  also 
asked what right the Congress(I) had to say that the Constitution 
should not be touched when it had imposed Emergency and  extended 
its Government's term from five to six years.

Asked whether it was the same Constitution which had  facilitated 
the return to democracy, Dr. Joshi said it was not because of the 
Constitution that democracy was restored, but because of the will 
of the people, he added.

Dr.  Joshi  refused  to be drawn into the  controversy  over  the 
Gujarat  Government's decision to allow State employees  to  join 
the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). He would only say, ``It is 
the  Gujarat Government's decision''. Asked whether  this  formed 
part  of  the  BJP  national policy, he merely  said,  ``I  am  a 
Minister in the NDA Government''.

On  the  ``body  shopping'' controversy in the  U.S.,  the  Union 
Minister  said the attitude of the U.S. officials  concerned  was 
highly objectionable. He said there was a reversal in brain drain 
from India and several talented IIT graduates were preferring  to 
stay  back and work in the country. He, however, hastened to  add 
that  if  there was a surplus of talents in  the  country,  there 
would be an outward flow. He did not agree with the view that the 
Uttar   Pradesh   Government  had  bowed  before   the   striking 
electricity  workers and said all that it had done was  to  defer 
privatisation  by  a  year.  The  Uttar  Pradesh  Government  was 
determined  to go ahead with formation of the corporations,  only 
privatisation had been put on hold, he said.Dr. Joshi said it was 
high  time the country showcased the capabilities of  its  talent 
pool  before the developed West. He pointed out that the  country 
now had some of the best talents in the entire world.

Replying to a question, he conceded that there was need to create 
mechanism for validating discoveries and cures of Indian  origin. 
Laboratories  under  his department were already doing  that,  he 
added.
