
Ready to brave odds


HE  MAY  be  appear to be a gawking 14-year old,  but  Master  P. 
Thirumalai showed the kind of courage and involvement when  faced 
with a crisis, that few seniors can muster.

Eighth  standard  students  like him generally  pore  over  their 
lessons  and  are oblivious to the urban chaos around  them,  but 
Thirumalai saved an accident victim from the jaws of death.

The  driver of the 18 K MTC bus ran away from the accident  spot. 
The  youngster's  effort, however, did not go  unnoticed  as  the 
Automobile  Association of Southern India (AASI)  recognised  his 
achievement with the ``Good Samaritan'' award for 1999.

Recalling  the incident that happened at Mettupalayam in  Chennai 
in early August, he says while ``I was filling air in my  bicycle 
tyre,  there  was  a shrill cry. It came  from  a  person  caught 
beneath the wheels of a bus. Though several people had  gathered, 
none  was  willing to assist the victim. When  I  extricated  the 
victim who was hurt and gave him first aid, they warned me that I 
was  getting  into  a police case, which would  lead  to  serious 
consequences.''  Ignoring  all  `advice',  the  son  of  a   road 
contractor  mounted the 18-year old victim on his  shoulders  and 
rushed him to a nearby hospital, where the doctor later certified 
that his action saved the life.

The  Junior  Red Cross member Master Thirumalai, who  aspires  to 
become  a  civil  engineer, said, ``I acted in the  spur  of  the 
moment. Now, I cannot think of lifting a fairly well-built man.'' 
The student of Anjuham Higher Secondary School, Saidapet, with  a 
brother and sister also confessed, ``though I am good in studies, 
Mathematics is slightly difficult.''

Attributing his presence of mind to the training rendered by  his 
Red  Cross  counsellor,  Ms.Deivamani, he  firmly  believes  that 
several  problems  including  traffic jams  could  be  solved  if 
students  unite.  The experience of Master  Thirumalai  with  the 
`public' is an indicator to the changing values of the society, a 
fact  underscored by Mr. M. K. Subramanian, the  AASI  Secretary, 
who  lamented, ``not only people come for help, but they also  do 
not pass information about such ideal deeds.''

The boy is the third recipient of the award, instituted in  1997, 
which had earlier gone to Mr. S. Shanmughanathan, a bank  officer 
and  Mr.  R. Amalraj, both of whom saved accident  victims  under 
difficult circumstances by rushing to them hospital.

( N. Ravi Kumar)
