
Cong. opposes move to float bonds


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD, JAN. 30. The APCC spokesman, Mr. K. Rosaiah, has  said 
the TDP Government's move to raise a sum of Rs. 1,000 crores  for 
implementing  power sector reforms by floating public bonds  will 
amount  to  imposing  a  further  burden  on  the   deteriorating 
financial position of the State.

Comparing  the  State's finances to a sinking boat,  Mr.  Rosaiah 
said  the  Government  was trying to making  it  go  under  water 
instead of salvaging it. Andhra Pradesh was already reeling under 
a  debt  burden of Rs. 28,000 crores which would  cross  the  Rs. 
30,000-mark by March-end.

Mr.  Rosaiah, who was referring to the statement by  the  Finance 
Minister,  Mr.  Y. Ramakrishnudu, about  the  State  Government's 
plans  to  seek  the Centre's permission  to  float  bonds,  told 
reporters  here  on Sunday that the Government had  exceeded  the 
ways and means position and availed itself of overdraft up to the 
maximum limit. The finances had become so critical that the Prime 
Minister had to sanction special assistance of Rs. 500 crores  to 
pay Government salaries in December.

He alleged that investors' confidence in the State Government was 
shaken  following diversion of money raised through bonds to  the 
treasury,  including a sum of Rs. 500 crores by the APSEB  before 
its  restructuring,  Rs.  300  crores each by  the  A.  P.  Roads 
Development   Corporation,  the  A.  P.  Irrigation   Development 
Corporation   and  the  A.  P.  Irrigation  Sources   Development 
Corporation. This amount of Rs. 1,400 crores was meant to be used 
for specific purposes such as improving the power infrastructure, 
building   State   roads  and  developing   irrigation   sources. 
Describing this as a reflection on the State's fiscal discipline, 
he  wanted the Government to inform people about  the  ``pathetic 
state'' of its finances before approaching them for more funds.

The  PCC spokesman said people must brace themselves for  another 
round  of fresh taxes after completion of local bodies  elections 
in March. They already had a ``taste'' of the Government's  plans 
when  it  raised RTC fares and several taxes within 100  days  of 
coming to power.

He reiterated the Congress demand that the TDP Government furnish 
a  list  of municipalities reserved for BCs, SCs, STs  and  women 
along  with an explanation about the rationale for reserving  the 
posts  of municipal chairpersons. The election notification  must 
be issued a week after making this list public.

Instead  of  responding to this demand, the  TDP  leadership  was 
confusing matters by stating that Congress already knew about the 
posts  which  were reserved. He asserted that the  APCC  did  not  
possess this information since the Chief Minister had kept this a 
secret to which only his partymen were privy.
