
Boon for Govt. college students


By K. Ramachandran

CHENNAI,  JAN. 30. Students in Government colleges in Tamil  Nadu 
will  be able to ride the information technology revolution  wave 
and  prepare  themselves  for the  future  under  the  ``computer 
education  scheme'' that the State has chalked out  with  private 
sector participation.

The  syllabus is expected to be finalised soon and the  programme 
launched by the coming academic year.

The Government wants to make about 75,000 Under-Graduate students 
computer literate and enable them to exploit the potential of the 
Internet  in any field of study or employment that they may  take 
up.

The  private sector infotech educational institutions  will  join 
the  effort to provide quality-computer training to  the  college 
students.

The  scheme will be modelled on a similar project  launched  this 
year in Government Higher Secondary Schools. 

The  move  to  take  such  computer  education  to  colleges  was 
announced  by the Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, during  the 
District Collectors' conference in December. He had said that the 
school  scheme  would be extended to all  the  Government  Higher 
Secondary  Schools and gradually to Government Arts  and  Science 
Colleges.

The latest scheme aims to cover one third of the total number  of 
students  in Government Colleges every year. The time-table  will 
be  adjusted to give each student 150 hours of  computer-learning 
in a year.

As in the school scheme, private I.T. educators will install  the 
equipment  and  software,  maintain them  besides  providing  the 
teaching faculty.

Tamil  Nadu  has about 60 Government Arts and  Science  Colleges, 
with  a strength of about 75,000 students. But only a  few  among 
them offer computer courses like B.Sc. Computer Science or BCA at 
U.G.  level.  The rest of the students, especially  in  non-urban 
areas,  have  little  access  to  quality  computer-education  or 
awareness about their use and utility in their institution.

These students, the government feels, are handicapped by lack  of 
proper training at a time when ability to use computers is a pre-
requisite for employment as well as further study. For a fee that 
will  be much lower than private I.T. institutes,  every  student 
can gain computer literacy. Students can also learn E-commerce.  

Making  a  departure  from the rush to  learn  programming,  this 
course  is  oriented at users, emphasising learning  of  computer 
skills.  The expanding world of Internet and its  application  to 
research is another aspect of the course.

The  school  computer  education scheme now  covers  666  schools 
implemented  at a cost of Rs. 112 crores, with assistance from  a 
chain of private sector infotech institutes. The computer science 
subject has been recast at the Plus Two level to suit the scheme. 
The  students pay a nominal sum to learn the Government  syllabus 
and if required, they undergo additional computer courses outside 
school hours.

In  the next four or five years, when these school students  come 
to  college,  they will have a substantial exposure to  the  I.T. 
environment, feel I.T. planners. 
