
25 girls 'kidnapped' in four months


By K. V. Subramanya

BANGALORE,  JAN. 30. The Bangalore City Police are now  facing  a 
new problem from the live bands which in the past posed a serious 
challenge  to the protectors of law. Police are baffled over  the 
``kidnapping'' of girls working as singers at the live bands.  In 
the  last  couple  of months, at least 25 such  girls  have  been 
kidnapped from Bangalore.

Though  only in a few cases complaints were lodged,  police  have 
found  that  more than two dozen girls were abducted  during  the 
last four months, a senior police officer told The Hindu. In  all 
the  cases, the girls were kidnapped in the night when they  were 
returning  home after performing at the live band shows and  were 
released by the abductors the next day.

Though  preliminary  investigations revealed that  a  four-member 
gang  was behind the kidnapping, police had not been able to  nab 
the culprits. An officer said the released girls were tightlipped 
and  were not coming out with details of the kidnappers and  also 
on what had happened after they were abducted.

Though the police suspect that the girls might have been sexually 
abused  by the abductors, none of them confessed that  they  were 
raped. The sources said the gang frequently changed vehicles  and 
also number plates to evade arrest.

One of the released girls revealed that after she was  kidnapped, 
the  abductors  took  her in a Maruti  car  to  Shivajinagar  and 
changed the number plate before going to an undisclosed place  on 
the outskirts of the city, the sources said. Police suspect  that 
the  same  gang might be involved in the robbery  cases  reported 
during the last few days. Meanwhile, police were also thinking of 
entrusting  the  Central  Crime Branch sleuths with  the  job  of 
inquiring  into  the  lifestyles  of the  live  band  singers,  a 
majority  of whom were from West Bengal and Mumbai.  Police  also 
expressed  helplessness  in initiating action  against  the  live 
bands  as  their  owners had not only obtained  orders  from  the 
Supreme  Court  preventing  police  from  interfering  in   their 
business but also filed contempt cases against police.

The sources said raids on the live bands had not produced desired 
results as the arrested persons got released on bail  immediately 
and ran the business as usual. Further, it is said that the  live 
band  lobby was so powerful that it could get things done in  its 
favour at the ``highest level''.

But  on their part, a few Deputy Commissioners of Police and  the 
Bangalore City Police Commissioner had chalked out a plan to curb 
the live bands without violating court orders. All live bands had 
been kept under surveillance. 
