
A change for the better


CITY RESIDENTS first came across automatic vending machines,  for 
milk. Later they started vending coffee. Now the Reserve Bank  of 
India, has introduced a vending machine to speed up the issue  of 
coins.

The  dilemma  for  residents seems to be, you  cannot  live  with 
machines (they take over particular jobs from people), you cannot 
live without them (people often do the job poorly or refuse to do 
it).  RBI's  change machine, imported from London, at a  cost  of 
about  Rs.  8 lakhs, has two chambers with a capacity  of  10,000 
pieces  each.  It has already been introduced  in  Bangalore  and 
Delhi,  says Mr. S. Ramaswamy, General Manager (Currency),  Issue 
Department.

The new machine can be programmed to dispense any denomination of 
coins. But at present, it has been programmed only to  distribute 
one  and  two  rupee coins. The machine has  been  introduced  in 
Chennai  on a trial basis, and depending upon the  feedback,  the 
number  of  machines  will  be  increased.  Maintenance  is   not 
difficult  and it can handle about 20,000 coins a day. Coins  are 
filled twice a day, says Mr. A. Madasamy, Deputy General Manager, 
RBI, Chennai. Plans are afoot to introduce the automatic  vending 
machines  in  important  places such  as  post  offices,  railway 
stations and a few nationalised banks, he adds.

Public  can  get petty change by inserting Rs. 50  and  10  rupee 
notes only. For Rs. 50 one can get 15 two rupee coins and 20  one 
rupee  coins and for Rs. 10, three two rupee coins and  four  one 
rupee  coins.  This  can  be changed  to  any  denomination  when 
necessary, says Mr. A. Srinivasan, Treasurer, Cash Department  of 
the bank.

With the introduction of the machine, the crowd at coin  counters 
has  come  down. The usage pattern shows that those who  get  the 
change from the machine join the queue again for the change.  `We 
are  trying  to  regulate the crowd with  our  staff',  says  Mr. 
Madasamy.

As the biggest change problem is encountered by commuters on  MTC 
buses  and  at Railway ticketing counters,  both  these  agencies 
could work out a schedule to get the change from the machine.

Already    in    cities    like    Bangalore,    Hyderabad    and 
Thiruvananthapuram  the  coins  are  available  aplenty.   Senior 
officials  feel  that coins from Hyderabad and  a  few  countries 
abroad  will come to their locker soon, after which the  shortage 
of coin supply will largely disappear.

(P. Oppili)
