
Autobiography of neurosurgeon released


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 30. Eminent citizens of the city today joined  the 
Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, in hailing the  contributions 
of  renowned neurosurgeon, Dr. B. Ramamurthy, on the occasion  of 
the release of his autobiography ``Uphill All the Way''.

His  interests were not just in neurosurgery or medicine, but  in 
political  and  social sectors too, said the Chief  Minister.  He 
keenly watched political developments and sociological issues.

Besides his outstanding professional achievements, Dr. Ramamurthy 
was also known for his kindness to patients.

He won acclaims from experts all over the world.

Even  while lauding the neurosurgeon referring to anecdotes  from 
the  autobiography,  Mr.  Karunanidhi  expressed  difference   of 
opinion  with him on issues like learning technical  subjects  in 
Tamil. Prof. M. S. Swaminathan, agricultural scientist, said  the 
autobiography  was a ``gripping book'' and a ``celebration  of  a 
great  life''.  It was very inspiring, he said. Besides  being  a 
world  class  professional, he was a great  institution  builder, 
Prof. Swaminathan said. 

Prof.  G. Arjundas, neurologist, who had a long association  with 
Dr.  Ramamurthy, said the latter was a true pioneer.  He  spawned 
several  generations  of neurosurgeons. But always  there  was  a 
``human''  behind his genius. It was Dr. Ramamurthy who  inspired 
him to start neurology, Prof. Arjundas said. He had intense faith 
on his students and affection for his patients.

Prof.S.Balaparameswara  Rao,  the neurosurgeon's  first  trainee, 
said  Dr.  Ramamurthy was a brilliant student at  Madras  Medical 
College (MMC). He started the neurosurgery department at the  MMC 
with  just  four beds against stiff opposition  and  professional 
jealousy. He was not just an individual, but an institution.

All  the  speakers  hailed the role  of  Dr.  Indira  Ramamurthy, 
Dr.Ramamurthy's  wife in his life. She was selfless and  devoted, 
they said. Replying to the remarks of the speakers, Dr.Ramamurthy 
said  his  association with Mr. Karunanidhi was  several  decades 
old.  A real friend was who did not mind objections and  in  this 
sense, the Chief Minister was a friend, he said. The neurosurgeon 
also  recalled  the  difficulties faced by  him  to  develop  the 
discipline  of  neurosurgery in India because of the  regimes  of 
``bureaucratic socialism''. 

The  proceeds  of the book will go to the ``poor  fund''  of  the 
Dr.A.Lakshimpathi Neurosurgical Centre, VHS Hospital.
