
Reviewing the Constitution


By K. K. Katyal

IT  WOULD be a pity if the debate on the Government's move for  a 
review  of the Constitution degenerates into a  controversy  over 
``differences''  between the President, Mr. K. R. Narayanan,  and 
the  Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee, pushing  into  the 
background  the consideration of substantive issues. Yet that  is 
precisely  what  happened  after  the  January  27  function   in 
Parliament  House  to  commemorate the 50th  anniversary  of  the 
Constitution.  There  was,  no  doubt,  a  divergence  in   their 
perceptions,  with the President opposing any tinkering with  the 
Constitution  and  the Prime Minister defending the  move  for  a 
review, invoking the need for stability at the Centre and in  the 
States. There is, however, no warrant for the assumption of  pre-
planning  on  their part - the President, it  appears,  spoke  in 
keeping  with  his  role in offering advice  to  the  Government, 
without   questioning   the  authority  vested  in  it   by   the 
Constitution  under  the  parliamentary  dispensation.  There  is 
nothing   to  suggest  that  Mr.  Narayanan  would   thwart   the 
Government's   plan  to  set  up  a  commission  to  review   the 
Constitution.

The  President-Prime  Minister  equation  has  been  a  favourite 
subject  of  discussion  in  the corridors  of  power  and  among 
political  commentators,  especially  when  there  are  signs  of 
strains or even when the two take differing positions within  the 
parameters  laid down by the Constitution. The evolution of  this 
relationship  was  far from smooth, even between  the  first  two 
holders  of  the top positions, Rajendra  Prasad  and  Jawaharlal 
Nehru.  They  were comrades in the freedom  struggle  and  worked 
closely  at the time of the framing of the Constitution and  yet, 
when  it came to delineating their powers and  interpretation  of 
the  relevant  constitutional  provisions,  they  often  clashed. 
Subsequently,  we  witnessed  two  extremes  in  the  Rashtrapati 
Bhavan.  One,  Fakhurudin  Ali Ahmed, in June  1975,  signed  the 
proclamation  of  Emergency, papers for which were taken  to  him 
after  midnight, before it was considered by the Cabinet  and  he 
acquired  the dubious title of ``rubber-stamp  President''.  Two, 
Giani Zail Singh, in the Eighties, made Rajiv Gandhi jittery,  so 
much  so  that  the  latter, fearing  dismissal,  did  not  allow 
Parliament  to  be prorogued, so as to be able to get a  vote  of 
confidence in the event of any drastic action by the President.

It  is, perhaps, a hangover of the past that  routine,  innocuous 
cases of divergence have of late been magnified and projected  as 
confrontation at the top. Last year, when Mr. Narayanan  required 
Mr. Vajpayee, then head of the first BJP-led Government, to  seek 
the  confidence of the Lok Sabha, many in the sangh  parivar  and 
others  saw  it as a case of animus against the  Prime  Minister. 
Earlier,  the President's action sending back to the Cabinet  its 
recommendation for the dismissal of the Bihar Government became a  
clash  of the high-ups. But by now, it should be possible to  see 
the  expressions  of  opinion  or proffering  of  advice  by  the 
President in the correct perspective.

As  for  the  stand  of the political  parties  on  changing  the 
Constitution, there is an ironic reversal of roles. Some 24 years 
ago,  it  was  the Congress Government,  then  headed  by  Indira 
Gandhi,  which  was instrumental in making  drastic  changes.  It 
happened at a time when free debate was not possible because  the 
Emergency was in force and the ruling party rushed with its plans 
-  with indecent haste. Apart from other things, the term of  the 
Lok  Sabha was extended from five to six years and  the  preamble 
changed  with  the  insertion  of  the  words  ``socialist''  and 
``secular''.  There  was a talk of setting up a  new  constituent 
assembly  but the idea did not find favour. The Law Minister,  H. 
R.  Gokhale, explained that this demand had been made because  of 
the feeling that a few amendments would not do and that the whole 
Constitution needed to be looked into afresh.

The   Opposition,  then  including  the  Jana   Sangh   (previous 
incarnation  of  the BJP), socialists and some  others,  who  now 
constitute  the ruling alliance, put up fierce resistance but  it 
was of no avail. 

But the non-Congress parties lost no time undoing the changes and 
restoring the checks and balances when they assumed power a  year 
later.  They swore by the sanctity of the Constitution  with  the 
same gusto with which the Congress had justified its decision for 
constitutional changes.

What are the changes contemplated now? Neither the Government nor 
the  ruling National Democratic Alliance has at any  stage  spelt 
out  the  ideas  in detail. Nor, for that  matter,  has  the  BJP 
provided a comprehensive set of proposals, even though the RSS is 
stated to be the main motivating force for this course of action. 
The  NDA's election manifesto contained a two-line  reference  to 
its plan to ``appoint a commission to review the Constitution not 
only in the light of experiences and developments since 1996 but, 
indeed,  of  the  entire post-independence period,  and  to  make 
suitable recommendations.'' The President's address to the  first 
session  of  Parliament on October 25 last year  reiterated  this 
resolve - to meet ``the challenges of the next century''. In both 
the  cases,  two ideas were specifically mentioned -  to  have  a 
fixed (five-year) term for the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies and 
to  replace  the present system of no-confidence  motion  with  a 
``constructive vote of no-confidence''. 

If  the  purpose  of the ruling combine or  the  Government  were 
confined  to  making  these two (or such) changes,  would  it  be 
necessary  to  moot  the idea of setting up a  commission  for  a 
review  of  the Constitution? Obviously, it has  in  mind  major, 
substantive  changes  which  could not be  effected  through  the 
amendment process. The first BJP-led Government, too, envisaged a 
deep, fresh look at the Constitution. This was how the point  was 
conveyed  through the President's address to Parliament on  March  
25, 1998: ``Fifty years after independence, the time has come  to 
rejuvenate  our  institutions so that they are strong  enough  to 
meet the challenges of the future. The Government proposes to  do 
so as well as appoint a commission to review the Constitution and 
make  recommendations so that anomalous experiences of  the  past 
are not repeated in the future.'' 

This  was  more than a year before the first Government  came  to 
grief  because  of its failure to secure the  confidence  of  the 
House.  As such the review plan is not to be seen in the  limited 
context of the developments which led to its fall but as part  of 
a bigger objective.

The   ``constructive   vote  of  no-confidence''  is   a   German 
innovation,  inscribed  in that country's Basic Law.  If  adopted 
here,  the  Lok Sabha may express its lack of confidence  in  the 
incumbent  Prime  Minister  by electing his  successor  with  the 
majority   of   its  members.  It  seeks  to   reduce   political 
instability,  by requiring the House not to be guided  by  purely 
negative  or  cavalier moves. A change to this  effect  does  not 
necessitate  a ``review'' of the Constitution or  its  amendment, 
not even a simple legislative measure. It could be brought  about 
by  revising the rules of procedure of the Lok Sabha as was  done 
when  the  concept  of  ``confidence  motion''  was   introduced, 
subjecting  the  Government or the Prime Minister to  a  test  of 
strength.

Suspicions about the motives of the present rulers arise  because 
of  the utterances by some of them when they were out of  office. 
At  one  stage,  Mr.  Vajpayee  himself  was  in  favour  of  the 
presidential form. His assurance now that the basic structure  of 
the  Constitution was not intended to be changed should rule  out 
the  Government's support for such a drastic proposal. But  could 
the  statements  and proposals which emanated the RSS  and  other 
members  of the sangh parivar in the past be ignored? There is  a 
feeling  that  the  constitutional  changes  were  favoured   for 
removing  obstacles to implementing the hidden  agenda.  However, 
there  is no cause for alarm - changes will be possible  only  if 
there is a national consensus.
