
Only the beginning


THE   TWO   CABINET  decisions  concerning  the   public   sector 
disinvestment  programme, although differing radically  in  their 
scope,  methodology and expected price realisation, send out  one 
clear common message: that the government is willing and able  to 
take  tough  decisions  even in an area which  has  been  proving 
particularly  contentious.  Beyond that,  however,  even  Cabinet 
decisions  cannot convey much. In economic reform matters  it  is 
not conceptualisation but implementation that has been difficult. 
Thus,  for  example, while there was a  consensus  on  appointing 
independent  regulators  to  preside  over  the  opening-up,  its 
practical implementation has been highly controversial, as proved 
noticeably by the insurance and telecom experience. The  decision 
to  go  ahead  with  the  sale  of  a  substantial  part  of  the 
government's stake in two different enterprises is thus only  the 
beginning.

Nearly all previous rounds of disinvestment since 1992 have  been 
faulted   essentially  on  procedural  matters,  even  if   price 
realisation and the timing have been the focus of the  criticism. 
Therefore,  while the blueprint for Indian Airlines'  share  sale 
looks  good on paper, it will face turbulence in  implementation. 
Almost  all  the  assumptions  made  will  be  severely   tested, 
especially  because  of the nature of the industry and  the  fact 
that  a sale like that has never before been made in  India.  The 
selection  of  a  strategic  partner,  who  will  take  over  the 
management  with a 26 per cent equity stake, will be  the  litmus 
test deciding, among others, the valuation of an enterprise which 
has  traditionally  been  asked  to fulfil  far  more  than  just 
commercial goals. The decision to keep out foreign airlines  from 
bidding for a strategic - even minority - stake and restrict most 
other types of overseas equity to 40 per cent will surely refocus 
on  the  opaqueness of the present civil  aviation  policy,  from 
which  these  two  apparently  irrational  conditions  have  been 
derived.  It would be premature therefore to fix a timetable  for 
IA's   eventual  privatisation.  Not  surprisingly,  a   parallel 
strategic  sale of the petrochemicals giant, IPCL, has  run  into 
difficulties even after the serious bidders were shortlisted.

The  above also indicates clearly that the conventional  measures 
of evaluating a public sector sale such as the price  realisation 
to  the government cannot be applied immediately at least in  the 
case  of IA. In the meantime it would be pertinent to take  stock 
of  the  likely consequences of privatisation,  both  before  and 
after the sale is completed. The world over the very announcement 
of sale of government stake in enterprises has helped boost their 
operational efficiencies and eventually their market  valuations. 
At the same time, labour market rigidities as well as the genuine 
concerns of employees will have to be reckoned with and solutions 
built  into the plan of action immediately. It is also  necessary 
to visualise the post-privatisation scenario and build safeguards 
both from the point of view of competition and for ensuring civil  
aviation's strategic and other non-commercial obligations to  the 
country.

The government's decision to sell nearly three-fourths of  Modern 
Foods'  equity  to Hindustan Lever seems to have  been  motivated 
primarily  by  the prospect of realising almost  Rs.  106  crores 
immediately.  Yet,  in common with most other aspects of  the  IA 
deal,  the  procedural  aspects,  including  safeguards   against 
arbitrary   retrenchment  and  asset  stripping,  merit   special 
attention. Like IA, Modern Foods was not expected to have a  pure 
commercial  orientation.  Even now more than 50 per cent  of  its 
turnover is from the sale of low-profit, but necessary items such 
as  bread. It is hoped that privatisation of both  the  companies 
will not automatically devalue their non-commercial objectives.
