
A guest from Nigeria


INDIA  AND  THE  West  African nation of  Nigeria  have  much  to 
contribute  to  each  other  in  terms  of  shared   evolutionary 
experience and expertise in industry and agriculture and have  so 
much in common that it is surprising the interaction between  the 
two  has been negligibly small compared to the scope.  By  having 
that  country's democratically-elected President as the guest  of 
honour  during this year's Republic Day celebrations,  India  has 
launched a major effort to set the relations right - and send the 
signal  that  it  seeks to revitalise its links with  a  part  of 
Africa that had remained neglected for long. For a broader  focus 
on the continent there could have been no better choice than  Mr. 
Olusegun Obasanjo, Nigeria's campaigner for good governance whose 
outspoken  support  for  democracy  was a  feature  of  the  last 
Commonwealth  summit.  ``We do not make any  distinction  between 
good  military  government and bad military government.  For  us, 
military government is bad as a matter of principle and from  our 
own  experience,''  he  remarked  in Durban  as  the  summit  was 
debating  the  issue of suspending Pakistan  following  the  coup 
there. He has impeccable credentials to speak on the subject:  he 
is  among  the few military rulers to have  organised  democratic 
elections  and respected the verdict by handing over power  to  a 
civilian government.

Mr.  Obasanjo's  strong comments in Delhi against the  menace  of 
terrorism  and his appeal to India that they  jointly  articulate 
their  common concerns at international fora stem from  Nigeria's 
traumatic  experience  with  violence and terrorism.  It  is  one 
country  that  has been immeasurably harmed by its  raw  material 
wealth. Its rich and plentiful oil contributed to the outbreak of 
the disastrous war in 1967 when the people of the Biafran  region 
tried  to  secede  and take the natural  wealth  with  them.  One 
million  people died in that conflict. Oil also contributed to  a 
vitiation  of the economy by inducing dependency on  one  product 
and  corrupted  national  life.  With  a  democratic   government 
installed  last summer after years of ruinous military  rule  and 
the  consequent promise of internal stability, there  is  renewed 
opportunity  for  India  to forge closer  ties  and  explore  new 
avenues of cooperation. The visit of Mr. Obasanjo must boost  the 
effort  to  expand  the ties, as symbolised by  the  decision  to 
reactivate the joint commission that remained dormant for much of 
the  past  decade because of the military rule in  that  country. 
Nigeria  is this country's second largest trading partner on  the 
continent   after  South  Africa  and  can  benefit  by   India's 
experience   as   it   pursues   its   own   ambitious   economic 
liberalisation programme. Major areas of cooperation include  key 
infrastructure and agro-based industries and the oil sector.

Multi-ethnic,  multi-religious  Nigeria, much like  India,  is  a 
country  that  has yet to realise its rich  potential.  Described 
once  as a jewel of Africa, Nigeria has seen more downs than  ups 
since  gaining independence in 1960. On balance, the  oil  wealth  
and  the  resourcefulness of the population, the largest  on  the 
continent, have been outweighed by the bloody Biafra war and  six 
violent  changes of government. The result has been that  Nigeria 
remains on the list of the poor whereas its potential should have 
turned  it  into a giant on the continent, rivalling  Mr.  Nelson 
Mandela's  South Africa. There is an emerging new threat  to  the 
democratic polity. A country already divided nearly equally - and 
quite uneasily - between a Muslim north and a Christian south  is 
witnessing the arrival of religious fundamentalism that can  pose 
the biggest challenge to national unity. The introduction of  the 
shariah  law in October in the northern State of Zamfara,  to  be 
followed  by two other States, is said to be heightening  tension 
and provoking fears of a break-up of the country.
