
Where textbooks preach hatred


By Asghar Ali Engineer

INDIAN  TEXTBOOKS  take a highly slanted and prejudiced  view  of 
minorities, particularly Muslims, and the Pakistani textbooks are 
no  different. They are so designed as to promote hatred  against 
Hindus and India. The powers that be in both the countries have a 
vested  interest  in keeping the hatred between  the  communities 
alive so as to benefit politically. The textbooks are written not 
simply  by  the prejudiced minds but with a  particular  purpose. 
Prejudice  is  more  often  the  product  of  ignorance  than  of 
political design. The Indian and Pakistani textbooks are  written 
with  a definite political purpose and they are more  mischievous 
than  prejudicial.  The seeds of hatred are thus  sown  in  young 
minds.

A  Pakistani  educationist and scholar, Ms.  Rubina  Saigol,  who 
examined  the  Pakistani textbooks, wrote a paper  ``Learning  to 
Hate:   Fundamentalism,  Modernity  and  Education''  which   was 
presented  at  a  South Asia seminar in  Berlin  last  year.  She 
observes: ``Education has often been regarded as a force  capable 
of  ushering  in  modernity,  progress  and  development.  It  is 
expected  to  take  society forward into the  future  armed  with 
scientific  knowledge  and  enlightened  thought.  In   official, 
political,  public, national and international discourse,  it  is 
almost  always  considered a progressive force  that  enlightens, 
broadens the mind, creates tolerance and harmony in society.''

``Education  must cultivate a progressive, tolerant,  non-violent 
and compassionate point of view and break all narrow barriers  of 
race, caste, creed and colour. The aim of education should be  to 
promote  a productive, moral and ethical personality  capable  of 
making our society worthy of emulation by others. Also, education 
should  teach the student to respect the `other' as  the  `other' 
is,  not how the other should be. The `other' should not be  seen 
as the mirror image of our own but unfortunately this is what our 
textbooks teach us to think. We always judge the `other' from our 
own viewpoint and accept or reject him/her. We hate those who  do 
not  fit  into our own mould. Thus our textbooks tend  to  create 
intolerance   and   rejection   of  the   `other'   rather   than 
acceptance.''

The  treatment  of women in Pakistani textbooks, like  in  Indian 
textbooks,  is  far from desirable. Nusrat  Jaweed,  a  Pakistani 
journalist,  writes in The News: ``The Pakistan Muslim League  of 
Nawaz  Sharif  surely represents the conservative values  of  the 
patriarchal right. Women must be `protected' and `controlled'  by 
this type. Rage comes out in the name of defending family honour. 
Killing  in the name of `our honour' and `our values'...  exposes 
the  Taliban-type loathing of women, which dominates  the  PML(N) 
mindset''.

The  Pakistani textbooks are also out to justify  separatism  and 
the creation of Pakistan. The Social Studies textbook produced by 
the  Punjab Textbook Board for class VI says: ``Today, all of  us 
Pakistanis live in a distinct and different lifestyle. Our dress, 
our music, our language, our way of thinking are all uniquely our 
own  and different in every way from those of other cultures  and 
areas. Our unique ways have developed after a journey of  several 
hundred years.''

Justifying  the creation of Pakistan on the political plane,  the 
class VIII Social Studies textbook absolves the Muslim League  of 
any responsibility and says: ``Jinnah's fourteen points ensured a 
political future for the Muslims. If they had been accepted,  the 
fear that the Muslims would become slaves would have  subsided... 
When the Congress, because of sheer obstinacy, refused to  accept 
these   points,  the  Muslims  decided  to  create   a   separate 
homeland...  With time, the Congress enmity towards  the  Muslims 
became apparent.''

The textbooks prescribed for standards IX and X, under the  title 
``Pakistan Ideology'', go a step further: ``Pakistan ideology  is 
based  on the ideas of Islamic system and it was also a  reaction 
to  the  Hindu  and British exploitation of the  Muslims  of  the 
subcontinent.  It was a revolt against the prevailing  system  of 
India where the Hindu nationalism was imposed on the Muslims  and 
their  culture.'' One textbook goes on to say, ``The  Hindus  and 
Muslims, in spite of living for centuries, could not forget their 
own individual cultures and civilisation and kept away from  each 
other.  They could not amalgamate in each other's way of life  to 
become one nation. 

``The  main reason for this difference of cultures,  civilisation 
and outlook was the religion of Islam which cannot be assimilated 
in any other system as it is based on the principle of... oneness 
of God... On the other hand, Hinduism is based on the concept  of 
multiple  Gods.  How  could  a  nation  which  believes  in   the 
multiplicity  of  Gods bestow its belief in oneness of  God,  and 
there  lies  the  difference  between Hindu  and  Muslim  way  of 
thinking.''

The  whole thing is reduced to a belief in the oneness of God  as 
if formation of a nation depends only on such religious  beliefs. 
On  the other hand, theologians, Maulana Husain Ahmed Madani  and 
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad fully supported composite nationalism and 
vehemently opposed the very idea of two-nation theory. 

One  textbook  says,  ``Islam  gives  a  message  of  peace   and 
brotherhood...  There  is no such concept in  Hinduism.  Moreover 
Islam  preaches  brotherhood, equality and justice. It  does  not 
differentiate  on the basis of colour, creed or status... On  the 
other  hand,  the Hindu society is based on  caste  system  which 
downgrades  the  entire mankind... How could Muslims  and  Hindus 
become  one nation in the presence of such glaring  contrasts  in 
their  outlook and way of living? There was such a vast  gulf  of 
ideas  which  could  not be bridged.  They  lived  together  like  
strangers   and   could  never  become  one  society.   In   such 
circumstances, there was no way for Muslims other than  demanding 
the partition of India.''

This is a travesty of truth. Pakistan did not come into existence 
for  these reasons. The main struggle was political and the  main 
question  was  a  power-sharing arrangement which  could  not  be 
satisfactorily  worked  out between the Congress and  the  Muslim 
League.  Jinnah was hardly bothered about theological  questions. 
Also,  everyone knows how status conscious the Pakistani  society 
is. Ethnic and sectarian conflicts have also proved, if proof  is 
needed,  that  religion  alone  cannot  be  a  viable  basis  for 
nationhood.  Secular nationalism based on equity and justice  are 
more  viable than religious nationalism based on the hegemony  of 
any ethnic group as is witnessed in Pakistan.

What  is surprising is that the class V Social  Studies  textbook 
lays the entire blame for the Bangladeshi movement on the  Hindus 
of  the then East Pakistan: ``After the war of 1965,  India  with 
the help of Hindus living in East Pakistan, incited the people of 
East  Pakistan  against West Pakistanis. In  December  1971,  the 
Indians  themselves attacked East Pakistan. As a result  of  this 
conspiracy,  East  Pakistan  separated from  us.  We  should  all 
receive military training so that we can foil the designs of  the 
enemy  in  the  future.''  The  conclusion  drawn  is   extremely 
dangerous  inasmuch as it promotes militarism instead  of  equity 
and  justice  and  respect for the demands  of  oppressed  ethnic 
groups.  There is no reference to the role of Mujibur Rehman  and 
his Awami League.

The  Hindus are projected as the eternal enemy in  the  Pakistani 
textbooks. ``Although both Muslims and Hindus participated in the 
war  of independence together, the Hindus through  sheer  cunning 
convinced the British that only Muslims participated in it.''

What  kind  of mindset such books will produce  among  the  young 
students  is  not  difficult to imagine. This is  being  done  to 
perpetuate  the  enmity  between India  and  Pakistan.  India  is 
demonised  by Pakistan and Pakistan, by Indian textbooks.  It  is 
only  peace that will be in the interests of the masses  in  both 
the countries. The textbooks should therefore be scrapped at  the 
earliest and replaced with those which bring out the strength  of 
the composite culture and commonalities.
