
Contradiction or condemnation?


Sir,  -  The  Congress  has  been opposed  to  a  review  of  the 
Constitution. This was evident as early as December 17 last  when 
its  Rajya  Sabha members argued that there was no need  for  any 
real  change. The President eloquently endorsed the same view  in 
his address to the joint session of Parliament on January 27.

The  Congress, led by its spokesman Mr. Ajit Jogi, has  said  its 
views  are  the same as those of the President.  Evidently,  deep 
down the fear is that a review might lead to a provision  whereby 
a person of foreign birth is barred from holding any high office.

The  President has either contradicted himself or  condemned  the 
Congress,  which  ruled the country for most of the  years  since 
Independence.  On the evening of January 25, the  President  told 
the  nation on TV that there was a sullen resentment amongst  the 
masses against economic inequalities which, in turn, were  likely 
to  lead to social upheavals. Dalits and tribals were  the  worst 
affected.  He  went  on to say a  decade  of  liberalisation  had 
completely  ignored the poor and the needy. Yet two  days  later, 
the  President  says  reviewing  the  Constitution  may  lead  to 
throwing away the baby with the bath-water.

Mr.  K.  R. Narayanan himself was a Union Minister  for  about  a 
decade  and, to that extent, is at least morally responsible  for 
this  pathetic state of affairs. Liberalisation is also a  policy 
inaugurated by a Congress Government, of which he was Minister. 

On  January  27, the President said the  ``Constitution  has  not 
failed us but we have failed the Constitution.'' This is  nothing 
short of a condemnation of how the grand old party ruled India.

Prafull Goradia,

New Delhi

Sir,  -  Mr. Harish Khare's enthusiastic  outbursts  against  the 
Vajpayee  regime  ``monkeying  around  with  the   Constitution'' 
(TheHindu,  Jan.  27)  are  nothing  but  a  reflection  of   his 
preconceived approach to the issue. 

Whether  the National Democratic Alliance has a mandate to go  in 
for  this  exercise  on the strength of  its  manifesto  is  only 
secondary,  since a Government can go beyond its declared  agenda 
if it benefits the nation. Moreover, rule in democracy is  marked 
by  the  numbers game which will never conform to  the  theme  of 
full-fledged  or  cent per cent mandate. The  umpteen  amendments 
made by the Congress during its days of absolute majority  cannot 
be  said  to have enjoyed the consensus and  concurrence  of  the 
people at large at any point of time.

After all, the Government proposes to have a commission to review  
the  Constitution. To say that we do not have  competent  persons 
such  as  Rajendra  Prasad  and M. C.  Setalwad  is  nothing  but 
bankruptcy of mind. The nation goes on without Mahatma Gandhi and 
Jawaharlal Nehru.

Renga Sankaran,

Periyakulam (T.N.)
