
Accessing global equity: freedom at a price


By C.R.L. Narasimhan

The  recent decision to ease restrictions on the issue of  global 
depository  receipts  (GDRs)  and  American  depository  receipts 
(ADRs)   by  Indian  companies  has  major  implications.   Quite 
obviously,  while allowing Indian companies easier access to  the 
global  markets,  the  decision  also  confers  on  them  and  by 
extension   the   macroeconomic   planners  a   high   level   of 
responsibility.

Will  the  companies and their financial intermediaries  such  as 
merchant  bankers  connected with the raising of  capital  abroad 
have  a  larger perspective (not just a one shot  equity  raising 
exercise)  than  they  did in  1993-94  when  similar  procedural 
freedom existed?

At that time all and sundry companies made a mockery of  whatever 
minimal entry level rules existed in the GDR market. A record  $3 
billion  was  raised  in  1994 alone.  But  one  measure  of  the 
devastation  most of them have caused to Indian paper  abroad  is 
seen in the GDR quotations in the secondary market.

Another  measure  of the damage can be gauged by  the  difficulty 
subsequent  -  much better quality - blue chip  issuers  such  as 
VSNL,  GAIL and MTNL - faced in the international markets. It  is 
also widely known that last time some issuers rigged their  share 
prices in India in order to influence their GDR prices.

Unethical practices along with downright poor quality of many  of 
the issuers - a few them had no business to be on Indian  bourses 
leave  alone  on those outside - ensured in a literal  sense  the 
devaluation  of  Indian  paper  abroad.  There  have  been  grave 
allegations  against  specific merchant bankers of  being  either 
inept or downright venal in carrying out due diligence.

Markets, a poor arbiter

Hence it would be the height of naivete to assume that the market 
can  be the best and final arbiter of matters concerning  capital 
issues  abroad. (Or for that matter within India).  Again,  going 
back  to the disastrous 1994 experience, it is easily  seen  that 
Indian paper - even topnotch ones - will not have smooth  sailing 
from  now on. Nearly 70 per cent of all GDRs placed at that  time 
are quoting at a discount to their issue price. Over 25 per  cent 
of  them  are at a discount to current price.  In  all  exercises 
related  to fixing of exposure limits for India (part of  country 
risk  data),  whether for short-term forex deals  or  for  medium 
dated bonds, the 1994 fiasco will be held against India. For  the 
macro economy it may have raised the premium on Indian paper.

A  distinction  now  being increasingly  made  to  highlight  the  
advantages of the ADR route over the GDR route is valid for  this 
discussion  but  only  up  to  a  point.  American  standards  of 
accounting  and  disclosure which an ADR issue entails  are  much 
tougher  to  comply  with. The argument therefore  is  that  only 
topnotch Indian companies can get through to the world's  largest 
pool  of investible resources. Indeed the experience of  Infosys, 
Satyam and ICICI indicates just that. But as a recent  analytical 
article  in a financial daily shows, it will take a while  before 
even India's top companies can continuously meet the requirements 
of the American bourses.

It is also unlikely that many other Indian companies will be able 
to  place  their shares through the ADR  route,  their  immediate 
intentions notwithstanding. Therefore, to draw conclusions  based 
on  the secondary market quotes for Infosys or Satyam  abroad  is 
not  correct. Even they may be a beneficiary of  the  ``novelty'' 
factor. There have been so few Indian issuers there.

There is of course a positive side to the discussion. The  recent 
relaxation permits Indian companies to place ADRs/GDRs freely and 
even on a private placement basis but only when they are  seeking 
to enhance their capital. The freedom given to the corporates  is 
considerable: the earlier two stage approval could take at  least 
a  month. That caused plenty of uncertainty since the  corporates 
had to issue shares in markets that are known to be fickle.  Only 
a  post facto approval from the Finance Ministry and the  RBI  is 
now required. IT companies, which have been deriving the  maximum 
benefit  in the ongoing relaxation, can now issue  shares  (under 
the  employees stock option scheme) automatically to their  staff 
stationed in India.

Viewed  from  the  angle of reform the freedom given  is  a  step 
forward.  It  is a continuation of the process  under  which  the 
Government  is  steadily  getting  out  of  micro-management   in 
critical   economic  areas.  Under  the  new  dispensation,   the 
companies  will be using the automatic route only for  augmenting 
their  capital.  Convertible bond issues will still  require  the 
prior  approval  of the Government. This is because  there  is  a 
substantial  element  of debt in these:it is prudent  to  monitor 
them.

Ultimately, the recent guidelines permitting Indian companies  to 
access  global  markets more freely have to be  judged  from  the 
angle  of the external sector. Capital inflows and  outflows  are 
still  restricted  - there being no immediate move  towards  full 
convertibility. But it is not wholly correct to think that  India 
is  fully insulated from the vagaries of  international  capital. 
Thus,  although  the reserves are extremely  comfortable  at  $35 
billion plus and by their very nature the equity offerings (which 
the  GDRs/ADRs  are)  are  more  stable  than  say  the  Euro   - 
borrowings,  there are substantial areas where  the  calculations 
can go wrong.

ADR/GDR  price volatility abroad can influence the  share  prices 
here  in a similar manner. Besides, the underlying shares can  be  
sold  in India and repatriated outside. In times  of  uncertainty 
that occurrence along with large-scale FII exodus can cause havoc 
to the economy. 

On  the other side too, foreign capital can move in  without  any 
major  rhyme or reason. In East Asia, for instance, the  domestic 
economies  were  unable  to absorb the  large  inflows.  Overseas 
bankers  too  bent  backwards  to lend  in  these  countries  for 
unviable projects. 

Hence,  while  the  latest guidelines take  the  economy  a  step 
forward  towards  liberalisation, their benefit can  be  measured 
only  over  time  and after the issuers  and  the  intermediaries 
demonstrate   that   they   can   combine   freedom   with    the 
responsibility.
