
Cadila Healthcare's ambitious plans


By N. N. Sachitanand

BANGALORE.  Cadila Healthcare of the Zydus group, one of  India's 
leading  pharmaceutical companies, will soon be  making  vaccines 
for  rabies and Hepatitis-B at its new manufacturing  complex  at 
Moraiya,  20 km from Ahmedabad. The company has tied up with  the 
Swiss Serum Vaccine Institute for the technology to make purified 
duck  embryo  rabies  vaccine  and with  the  Korea  Green  Cross 
Corporation  for the knowhow to make recombinant DNA  Heaptitis-B 
vaccine.  With  the  Korean  company,  it  is  a  production  and 
marketing joint venture.

Announcing this to visiting presspersons at the new facility, Mr. 
Pankaj  R. Patel, Managing Director of Cadila  Healthcare,  added 
that the company has also entered into a technical  collaboration 
with  Ethical  Holdings of the U.K. to make and  market  advanced 
transdermal  drug delivery patches. The plant, with an  installed 
capacity  of  10  million  patches  annually,  is  likely  to  be 
commissioned in March 2001. To begin with, the company will  make 
patches  containing  nicotine  (for  reducing  the  craving   for 
cigarettes)   and   Diclofenac   sodium   (for    analgesic/anti-
inflammatory indications).

Cadila  Healthcare  has also entered into a 50:50  joint  venture 
with  Byk Gulden of Germany, the worldwide patent holder  of  the 
novel  proton pump inhibitor, ``Pantoprazole''. Called Zydus  Byk 
Healthcare  Ltd.  , this will be a 100 per cent  export  oriented 
unit.

The  Rs. 100-crore Moraiya manufacturing facility, which  with  a 
covered  area of 1.36 lakh sq. metres is the largest of its  kind 
in India at a single location. It conforms to good  manufacturing 
practices  and is fitted with a computerised inteligent  building 
management  system for control of parameters such as  temperature 
and  humidity  in  different zones as per  requirement.  It  will 
include a formulations facility (tablets, capsules, liquid  orals 
and injectables), a biological production facility ( vaccines and 
antibiotics) and a quality control laboratory.

Cadila  has  been  achieving  a CAGR of 17.85  per  cent  in  its 
turnover  and 91.94 per cent in its profits after tax since  1995 
and  is  now ranked as the sixth largest pharma  company  in  the 
country.  According to Mr. Patel, the ambition of the company  is 
to become one of the top three players in India by 2005.  Besides 
expansion  of  its  bulk  drugs unit at  Ankleswar  and  the  new 
formulation facility at Moraiya , which together will cost around 
Rs. 200 crores, the company also will be spending Rs. 250  crores 
next year in acquiring brands and facilities abroad to expand its 
business.

The  company's  sales in 1998-99 stood at Rs. 361 crores  with  a  
profit  of  Rs.  30.36 crores and the  turnover  in  the  current 
financial year is expected to be around Rs. 475 crores.

Cadila  Healthcare  has a strong presence in two of  the  top  30 
segments of the domestic therapeutic market which account for  63 
per cent of the total pharma sales in the country. To  accelerate 
its  growth, the company is focussing on introducing several  new 
products  in  the  fast  growing  therapeutic  segments  such  as 
cardiovasculars, gastrointestinal, biologicals, anti-inflammatory 
and  anti-infectives. The proportion of its products  under  Drug 
Price Control Order is currently 31 per cent and will be  reduced 
to 20 per cent in the next three years.

To prepare for 2005, when India will be joining the international 
patent regime, Cadila Healthcare is investing substantially in  R 
&  D. The expenditure on research has been ramped up from  1  per 
cent of the turnover in 1997-98 to 5 per cent this year. A new  R 
&  D  centre  costing  Rs. 46 crores coming  up  at  the  Moraiya 
facility will be ready for occupation by March this year.  Around 
200 scientists are expected to be working at this centre.

Cadila Healthcare plans to tap the equity market in  mid-February 
with an IPO of 1.49 crore shares through the book building route. 
The  proceeds  will  be utilised for  part  funding  the  ongoing 
projects at Ankleshwar and Moraiya.
