
Privatisation of Indian Airlines: a long way to go


By V. Jayanth

The  Cabinet  decision  to  hive off 26 per  cent  of  the  Union 
Government's  stake  in  the national  domestic  carrier,  Indian 
Airlines (IA), is only the first step in a protracted exercise to 
disinvest 51 per cent from the airline.

Perhaps  because of the initiative of the Minister of  State  for 
Disinvestment,  Mr. Arun Jaitley, two major decisions  have  been 
announced  -  that the Centre will give away 51 per cent  of  its 
stake  and then allow the `strategic partner' with a 26 per  cent 
equity to run the airline.An inter-ministerial committee will now 
go into the details of the disinvestment mode and the  Government 
will first pick a consultant or adviser to provide the  framework 
and help identify a suitable, strategic partner.

By any account, this is going to be a long drawn process. But the 
decision  has  come at the right time and sent  out  the  correct 
signals on the directions of economic reforms. IA has announced a 
marginal profit for the first half year and is likely to complete 
a third year of profitable operations. But the accumulated losses 
still remain.

Competition  is  hotting  up  in  civil  aviation,  both  in  the 
international  and domestic sectors. IA's fleet  replacement  and 
augmentation  programme  has been hanging fire for  a  couple  of 
years,  owing  to political uncertainties at the Centre  and  the 
brief tenure of previous governments.

The  airline's equity has remained low - around Rs.  105  crores. 
The  Centre's  plan to inject fresh capital of  Rs.  125  crores, 
besides providing another Rs. 325 crores as margin money for  the 
aircraft purchase programme, has not yet materialised.

While announcing the disinvestment plan, the Government has  left 
several questions unanswered. For instance, does it mean that  it 
will  back out of its commitments to inject the  promised  equity 
and margin money? With no timeframe set for the purpose, how long 
will it take to find a strategic partner and complete the process 
of handing over the management of IA?

The present domestic aviation policy prohibits a foreign  airline 
from  taking  a  stake in  India's  domestic  airlines.  However, 
aviation sources argue there are enough safeguards to prevent any 
foreign  airline from taking a majority stake in IA or  capturing 
the country's domestic aviation sector through the back door.  By 
offering  them only 26 per cent, and keeping another 25 per  cent 
with  Indian  financial institutions, airline employees  and  the 
public  (through the market), the Centre can be  reasonably  sure 
that  no  foreign  investor will be able  to  secure  a  majority 
holding  in the company. As of now, the Government will  hold  49  
per  cent, though this may come down to 26 per cent in course  of 
time. So, why is the Government afraid of tying up with a foreign 
airline  to  revamp  and  run  Indian  Airlines  efficiently  and 
profitably? Does Air India not have a stake in Air Mauritius?

From British Airways to Air Lanka, there are now many examples or 
models in privatisation. The proposed consultant must be able  to 
pick on the right formula and terms to suit Indian conditions and 
the equity holding on offer.

As  for the reaction of the IA employees and the unions,  sources 
say ``There may be a general opposition to privatisation. But the 
crux  of  the problem is in the overstaffing. IA now  has  22,000 
employees  and any private management will find that  number  too 
large to turn the company round. 

The  real problem will begin when the axe falls on some jobs.  It 
needs  an  attractive voluntary retirement scheme  to  make  this 
work''.  More  than  anything else,  Indian  Airlines  needs  new 
aircraft to replace its aging fleet and its flabby administration 
needs  to be pruned and revamped. The induction  of  professional 
and  technically  qualified managers to run the  airline  becomes 
imperative in this age of cut-throat competition.

During  the past two years, the airline has tried to improve  its 
customer  relations  and meet the  competition  through  `product 
improvement'.  But  much  more  needs  to  be  done.   Individual 
productivity,  courtesy  in  service,  employee  discipline   and 
austerity in management hold the key to successful  restructuring 
of the airline, in the short and medium term.

Before   hiring   a   consultant/adviser,   the   Ministries   of 
Disinvestment  and Civil Aviation will have to clearly spell  out 
the terms and conditions for the strategic partnership. 

If  they  want  to attract the right kind of  investors  who  can 
provide  a  competitive edge to IA, they must not only  make  the 
offer  attractive,  but outline a transparent framework  for  the 
future management of the airline. 

The important thing is that Indian Airlines needs not just  fresh 
investment, but an efficient and professional management.  Unless 
the  private  or foreign investor can bring  in  that  expertise, 
along with funds, it will not help.
