
Cyclicals remain under pressure


By Oommen A. Ninan

MUMBAI,  JAN. 30. The stock markets continued to remain  volatile 
and  a  correction  is  imminent. As  the  behaviour  of  foreign 
institutional investors (FIIs) is unpredictable, operators prefer 
to  wait and watch. Any movement in share prices is likely to  be 
scrip specific rather than sector specific, largely dependent  on 
the financial performance of the corporate concerned..

``Things  are  quite  mixed as the stocks are going  up  and  the 
breadth remains quite low. Now the movements on bourses depend on 
corporate  results  and liquidity. More than sector  specific  it 
will  be more stock specific,'' said Mr. Aditya  Srinath,  equity 
analyst,  SSKI  Securities Ltd. On FII investments,  Mr.  Srinath 
said  that so far in this month the FIIs' fund flow  was  erratic 
and  volatile  while the market was expecting a heavy  inflow  of 
money.  ``But we still believe that the trend is positive in  the 
medium and long term,'' the analyst. Srinath added.

Last  week cyclical stocks remained under pressure with  not  too 
encouraging  results  announced by many of  the  corporates.  The 
performance has been mixed with several of the companies in  core 
sectors such as cement, steel and capital goods industry  turning 
out results lower than market expectations. While Grasim, Gujarat 
Ambuja  and  Dalmia  Cement  reported  encouraging  performances, 
Madras Cement and ACC disappointed. Auto companies reported mixed 
results  with  heavy commercial vehicle manufacturers  Telco  and 
Ashok Leyland showing contrasting performances. 

The auto industry which has been showing increasing sales  volume 
have not translated into improving bottomlines except in the case 
of Bajaj Auto and Hero Honda. Performance of fast moving consumer 
goods (FMCG) companies indicate a slowdown in sales with pressure 
on profitability except in the case of ITC. Pharmaceutical  firms 
have  disappointed as the results of Ranbaxy, Cipla and  Cheminor 
Drugs  have  indicated. Hotel companies remained  under  pressure 
with falling sales and margins

Some thoughts as coming through the end of the first month of the 
new calendar year 2000: During January the Bombay Stock  Exchange 
30-Share Sensitive Index (Sensex) opened with a gap on the  first 
trading  day of the month at 5209 and has so far only  once  gone 
below  that  level  to  touch 5184  intra-day  on  the  extremely 
volatile Wednesday the January 5. The market closed weak on  last 
Friday  at  5335,  down 34 points. The  general  mood  on  Friday 
evening  was bullish and everybody was confident that the  market 
will open strong on Monday. 

However,  there  is  a note of caution as NASDAQ  and  Dow  Jones 
crashed  last Friday to close 150 points down on the  NASDAQ  and 
around 270 points down on the Dow Jones. The apparent reason  for  
this fall in the American markets is due to an expected  increase 
in  interest  rate  by the FED. This move has  upset  the  Indian 
markets in the kerb. 

The average badla rates would be around 30 per cent substantially 
higher than the 22 per cent average in the previous week. The net 
outstanding  positions increased to 15.51 crore shares valued  at 
Rs.  3,752 crore as compared to 15.35 crore shares valued at  Rs. 
3,588 crores at the end of the previous week. 

On  top of the steep rise in badla rates, the Index on a week  to 
week basis has declined by 87 points while net outstandings  have 
moved  up  by approximately 160 crores. ``Very  shortly  we  will 
start  talking  about  the  ``fiscal  deficit'',   ``subsidies'', 
``GDP''  and  all  budget related terminologies.  This  could  be 
enough   reason  to  possibly  lead  the  much  awaited   desired 
correction in the market,'' said Mr. Arun Kejriwal, an analyst. 

The  Union Budget will be presented in Parliament by the  Finance 
Minister Mr. Yeshwant Sinha on Tuesday, February 29 at 12 noon.

The FIIs have been very active and aggressive during of  January. 
Their  gross  turnover is already 50 per cent higher  than  their 
best  month of 1999, when they had a gross turnover of Rs.  7,800 
crores.  This does not necessarily indicate that they  have  been 
aggressive  buyers or sellers. But certainly conveys a  sense  of 
optimism among FIIs about their investment in India. 

The  market  operators  are  unhappy  on  the  decision  by   the 
Securities  and  Exchange Board of India (SEBI) to add  100  more 
stocks to the rolling settlement list which came as a rude  shook 
to them. Operators by and large believe that this is a retrograde 
step  as it leads to a decline in volume and the lower  liquidity 
leads  to a decline in interest in the scrips and make entry  and 
exit into the stock a nightmare for institutional players. 
