
A lively match, but it's the same old story in the end


By G. Viswanath

PERTH,  JAN. 30. The Australian cricketers took some hard  knocks 
before  the  final series of the Carlton &  United  championship. 
Their top notch one day specialist batsmen Michael Bevan (man  of 
the  match) sustained his side's winning streak with a  typically 
aggressive  effort either side of the rain that held up play  for 
more  than half-an- hour, but did not force a fresh target to  be 
determined. 

The  fortunes of the Indians team seemed to be changing with  the 
weather  itself.  The Indians batted when it was  hot  and  humid 
before  a pleasant and cool breeze set in to soothe the  sweating 
bodies. But in the end, the home team won by four wickets.

The sort of a `dead rubber' match of the tri-series throbbed with 
life  till  the  very  end  with  the  first  left  hand  spinner 
introduced  in 21 days raising a very pertinent question  of  why 
his  captain  and  coach had not looked up to  him  as  a  second 
spinner. Joshi's splendid ten-over spell and Robin Singh's medium 
pace  brought India back into the match while defending  a  small 
target of 226.

That Steve Waugh's team won its seventh match in a row only  with 
three balls showed that there was some spirit left in some of the 
Indians.  Coach  Kapil Dev was cross with  Match  Referee  Cammie 
Smith  for awarding the Australians a full quota of 50  overs  to 
make 227. Kapil was livid and contested the decision of mr. smith 
who denied the Indians 50 overs in the match against Pakistan  at 
Hobart. 

``Today  the Australians took 12 extra minutes to complete  their 
50 overs and yet they were given 50 overs.''

The  commitment  by the Indians on the last day of  their  failed 
tour  was  a plus point. They did not finish on  a  winning  note 
because poor fielding let the team down badly. 

The  Indians lost their 13th match of the tour, to  Australia  at 
the  WACA, but not by a margin to make it a far cry from being  a 
true  contest. The Australians must be in a way happy that  their 
resolve  was  tested by a bunch of Indians some of whom  must  be 
hoping to play till the end of the Indian summer. 

Sunil  Joshi's  joy  of  playing  for  India  must  have  been  a 
schoolboy's,  his captain not having the confidence in him  after 
the second Test against New Zealand at Kanpur.

There  was  something a bizarre about the make up of  the  Indian 
team  that  took  the field in the 12th match of  the  Carlton  & 
Unites  series.  The eleven did not have the name  of  the  vice-  
captain  and  team's  top  spinner.  They  opted  to  watch   the 
proceedings  from the WACA dressing room. It is not easy to  keep 
the enthusiasm going when the finalists have already been spotted 
in  a  three-team tournament and when the third team  knows  that 
there is nothing at stake.

It  became  a  simple and straight job to pick  the  eleven  once 
Sourav Ganguly, Anil Kumble and Nikhil Chopra declared themselves 
unavailable.  Tendulkar had also hurt the ligaments of his  right 
hand  while  flinging to take a catch against  Pakistan,  but  he 
decided to play. 

``We did not want to aggravate the injuries,'' said Kapil Dev. 

Sourav had taken cortisone shots since the back-to-bat matches at 
Adelaide and his right knee was too weak for him to take a risk. 

``Kumble  has a strained muscle. They declared themselves  unfit. 
And  I chose Venkatesh Prasad because he is a better bowler  than 
Debasish Mohanty,'' said Tendulkar.

The  match  began  with a new set of  openers  in  Tendulkar  and 
Venkatsai  Laxman. The Indian captain, a victim of  umpire  Simon 
Taufel's  poor decision in the previous match  against  Pakistan, 
was  not at ease playing Glenn McGrath. But this time he did  not 
fall  to  the Australia's No. 1 seamer; he was bowled  by  Damien 
Fleming,  an underrated bowler who has the ability to  swing  and 
who  has  often  provided  breakthroughs.  The  ball  that   took 
Tendulkar's off stump was a beauty. Fleming showed the rare skill 
to make the ball curve in and leave the bat.

Laxman once again fell to a poor score, leaving Rahul Dravid, who 
had a one hour talk with Sunil Gavaskar, and Hrishikkesh Kanitkar 
to stage a recovery act. Dravid was a failure in the Test series. 
But he has made amends in the tri- series. The 95 runs they  made 
was  not only almost half of India's total of 226, but they  also 
spoiled Shane Warne's comeback match. 

``He  (Warne)  looked a bit rusty. We have not ruled  out  Stuart 
MacGill  for the finals at Sydney. Surely, Stuart is the man  who 
will be on call if the wicket at Sydney is going to help  spin,'' 
said Steve Waugh. 

As  has  always been the case, it was the  Australians'  fielding 
that broke the partnership. This time Ricky Ponting held a superb 
catch to terminate the promising innings of Kanitkar.

Robin  Singh  has rarely let India down. On Sunday there  was  an 
opportunity  for him to have a good look at the bowling and  pick 
his  shots.  There was assistance for him from Sameer  Dighe  who 
must  be now a front runner for Test match selection. He has  not 
dropped  a  single catch at the wicket in eight matches.  He  and 
Robin added 73 runs for the sixth wicket. This was the first sign 
of defiance from the Indians in the morning session.

The  Australians  appeared  to coasting to  victory  when  Joshi, 
coming  in  as a fourth bowler, struck in the  very  first  over, 
dismissing Mark Waugh. ``He (Joshi) and Robin Singh bowled  great 
spells  which brought us back into the match. But I think we  did 
not  bowl well in the last three overs and our fielding  too  was 
not up to the mark. I am happy we did not give up, but the bottom 
line is we lost. And I am very disappointed,'' said Tendulkar.

Australia's  fourth wicket pair of Bevan (who has now become  the 
highest  scorer in the tri-series) and Ponting were  going  great 
guns  when  Joshi had Ponting caught by Agarkar.  Ponting's  exit 
coincided with the rain, but the groundstaff was quick to protect 
the  pitch and the centre square.  The good thing about the  WACA 
ground  is  that  it can take any amount of  water.  The  puddles 
disappeared  in a matter of minutes for the umpires  to  announce 
resumption  of  play without any cut in the number  of  overs  at 
their first inspection.

Australia lost Bevan, Stephen Waugh and Shane Lee, but the target 
of  227 was always going to be small for the Indians to  force  a 
win. 

``Yes, there were some hiccups and we were under pressure. It was 
a hard ride in the end. We have to refocus for the finals. I have 
always   thought   of  Robin  as  a  good   player   in   one-day 
Internationals and I am surprised Joshi has not got more games,'' 
said Steve Waugh. 

Warne  failed  as a bowler, but gave the hammer  to  Srinath  and 
Prasad which was what disappointed Tendulkar. 

Sachin vouches by youngsters

Sachin  Tendulkar  said youngsters like  Hrisikesh  Kanitkar  and 
Jacob  Martin  should  be given more opportunities  in  the  home 
series against South Africa.

``We  have to persist with the policy of grooming  young  players 
for  the future. This is what we have been doing since  the  home 
series  against  New  Zealand. Kanitkar  and  Martin  have  shown 
promise  and  to realise their potential we must  have  faith  in 
them,'' said Tendulkar.

``I   don't  want  to  explain  the  reasons  for  India's   poor 
performances  here in Australia. Everybody has seen it.  I  think 
the first priority should be to change the quality of pitches for 
the domestic championships. Then we will get quality batsmen  and 
bowlers.  And  there will be competition for places  too  in  the 
team.'' 

- Our Special Correspondent


INDIA

S. Tendulkar b Fleming                 3
(21b)
V. V. S. Laxman c Warne b B. Lee       3
(22b)
R. Dravid c M. Waugh b S. Lee         65
(106b, 6x4s)
H. Kanitkar c Ponting b Martyn        30
(49b, 3x4s)
D. Gandhi c Martyn b Warne            13
(18b, 2x4s)
Robin Singh c M. Waugh b McGrath      45
(51b, 2x4s)
S. Dighe (not out)                    36
(38b, 3x4s)
S. Joshi (not out)                     2
(3b)
Extras (lb-14, nb-8, w-7)             29
                                     ---
Total (for 6 wkts. in 50 overs)      226
                                     ---

Fall   of   wickets:  1-11  (Tendulkar),  2-11   (Laxman),   3-92 
(Kanitkar), 4-113 (Gandhi), 5-145 (Dravid), 6-218 (Robin).

Australia  bowling:  McGrath 9-3-22-1, Fleming 8-2-37-1,  B.  Lee 
7-0-22-1,  S. Lee 8-0-38-1, Martyn 5-0-19-0, Warne  9-0-57-1,  S. 
Waugh 4-0-17-0.

AUSTRALIA

A. Gilchrist c Robin b Agarkar         6
(13b)
M. Waugh c Dighe b Joshi              40
(63b, 6x4s)
R. Ponting c Agarkar b Joshi          33
(55b, 2x4)
M. Bevan c Tendulkar b Robin Singh    71
(92b, 9x4)
S. Waugh b Robin Singh                19
(48b, 1x4)
D. Martyn (not out)                   19
(20b, 2x4)
S. Lee (run out) (Dravid/Dighe)        2
(8b)
S. Warne (not out)                    16
(11b, 3x4)
Extras (lb-7, nb-8, w-9)              24
                                     ---
Total (for 6 wkts in 49.3 overs)     230
                                     ---

Fall  of  wickets:  1-39  (Gilchrist),  2-78  (M.  Waugh),  3-136 
(Ponting), 4-190 (Bevan), 5-201 (S. Waugh), 6-205 (S. Lee). 


India  bowling:  Srinath  10-0-55-0,  Agarkar  10-0-39-1,  Prasad 
9.3-0-59-0, Joshi 10-1-33-2, Robin Singh 10-0-37-2.



