
Nationals from today


BANGALORE,  JAN. 31. Karnataka and cue sport, have  an  intricate 
relationship and it is only fitting that the State Association in 
its golden jubilee year has been entrusted with the arduous  task 
of  hosting  the  24-day-long  billiards  and  snooker   National 
championships  for  men, women and juniors, that begin  with  the 
women's snooker and billiard from Monday.

Farah Khan, the reigning champion from the state in both  snooker 
and  billiards,  is all hyped up. This time around  the  talented 
lady will be playing on her own backyard, so to say, which is all 
the more reason for her to rise above expectations. 

But  then Farah is not going to have it easy. Besides  her  final 
opponents  of the last Nationals in Delhi - Amrita  Mohapatra  of 
Orissa in billiards and statemate Judit Walia in snooker -  Farah 
will  have  to  contend  with  Maharashtra's  Anuj  Thakur,  Usha 
Khandelwal and Varsha Mazumdar among others in snooker, and  Renu 
Bharkutiya  (MP),  Pooja  Galundia  (Rajasthan)  and   statemates 
Sridevi  and  Uma Devi in billiards, that  follows  snooker  from 
February 4.

With  a good number of entries in all the sections - a record  of 
sorts  - the field is divided into eight groups with the top  two 
players from each group qualifying for the knock-out stage. 

While  the  group and pre-quarterfinal matches will  be  best-of- 
three  frames from quarterfinals onwards, it will be  a  best-of-
five  frames encounter. The championship is to be played on  four 
tables.

The  qualifying  rounds  of  the  senior  national  snooker   and 
billiards will be held concurrently with the women's events. 

The  senior  and  junior  nationals  is  to  follow  the  women's 
championship,   with   seven  times  champion  Geet   Sethi   not 
participating owing to personal commitments. 

Sadly  with the sponsors keeping a distance, the  Association  is 
faced  with  an  uphill  task.  But  with  the  come-whatever-may 
attitude  of  the  association  big-wigs  led  by  its  mercurial 
president,  S.  Balasubramniam  and  secretary  Subahu  R.  Desai 
leading from the front, most of the hardship has been swept under 
the carpet. 
