
Plenty of lessons to be learnt


One  must say that the Indian team put up a pretty good fight  in 
the  last  league  match of the Carlton  and  United  Tri-series. 
Australia might have won the keenly contested encounter at Perth, 
but  only  after Sachin Tendulkar's men had tried their  best  to 
defend a score of 226.

Finally,  India managed to post a decent total after  losing  two 
early  wickets;  it  did  not prove enough  in  the  end  though. 
However,  the  spirited effort was encouraging and  it  certainly 
augurs well for the future.

There  are plenty of lessons to be learnt from the  Tri-  Series. 
Firstly,  India cannot afford to depend on Tendulkar and  Ganguly 
in every match.

Secondly,  the batsmen coming in at the crucial No. 4, 5,  and  6 
slots,  have to make sizable contributions. And the  lower  order 
should chip in with useful scores as well.

Finally, the team management has to try something  unconventional 
and  unorthodox if all the other methods fail. There is a  school 
of  thought which believes that when the team is under  pressure, 
innovations are the need of the hour. But the changes have to  be 
radical  in nature and should bring about a dramatic  improvement 
in the performance. 

New  Zealand's  tactics  in the 1992 World  Cup  comes  to  mind. 
Indeed, Martin Crowe was a pioneer in many ways. His decision  to 
ask  off-spinner  Dipak Patel to open the  bowling  clicked,  and 
soon, the other teams had picked up the cue.

Coming  back to the game at Perth, Rahul Dravid and  Robin  Singh 
did bat well. It has been written repeatedly in this column  that 
Robin  should come at No. 3, for then he would get more  time  to 
build an innings and go for the big scores.

He  is a very useful cricketer, but one gets the impression  that 
he  is  also grossly under-rated. His utility value has  not  yet 
been fully realised by the team. Robin, a good stroke-player  who 
is  also capable of sticking around, has been in the scene for  a 
long period now. And it is time his performances get recognised.

In  his  first  match  of the tour, but the  last  game  for  the 
Indians, left-arm spinner Sunil Joshi did fairly well. One  feels 
the team would have been better served had he played earlier. The 
team management has to experiment with the resources available if 
the  going  is  not good, and the move to include  Joshi  in  the 
eleven came a bit too late in the day.

This  has to be one of the worst tours by India; the players  and 
the team management would like to forget it quickly. But at least  
in  the  last match, where India stretched the contest  till  the 
last  over,  there  was  a visible change  in  the  approach  and 
attitude,  which  were  definitely  more  positive.  This  is   a 
refreshing sign.

K. SRIKKANTH
