
A contest to determine the worst of teams!


By Our Special Correspondent

MUMBAI, JAN. 30. In a case of too much too late, Central Zone and 
West Zone made key additions to their squads on the eve of  their 
final  Deodhar Trophy game, a match which will be  contested  for 
the  most minor placings possible. West and Central, who meet  at 
the  Wankhede Stadium on Monday, have only won a single match  in 
three Deodhar Trophy games so far. The team which loses  tomorrow 
will  have  to suffer the humiliation of being tagged  the  worst 
one-day  side  in the country; the winner though will  have  done 
only slightly better.

The  progress  of  the two new faces in the two  squads  will  be 
followed with interest: Central's Sanjay Bangar produced a scene-
stealing  performance in the Wills Trophy and the  Railwayman  is 
being talked about as the kind of competitive all- rounder  worth 
being  tried  out at a higher level. West's Amit  Dani  has  been 
invested with much hope here in Mumbai as the team's pace bowling 
attack grows a little long in the tooth and short on venom.

Bangar  sat  out  most of the Deodhar Trophy  owing  to  a  groin 
injury,  but is likely to turn out for Monday's match.  Dani  was 
left  out  of the Deodhar squad in place of  the  young  left-arm 
bowler  Zahir Khan who has been too wayward to be lethal  in  the 
competition. 

He  is  likely to be named following an shoulder  injury  in  the 
field to the old Maharashtra warhorse Iqbal Siddiqui in the  last 
match. 

Dani's  should relish the moment: his New Year began in the  most 
memorable fashion, at the Wankhede Stadium. He was the  architect 
of  Saurashtra's destruction in a Ranji Trophy West  Zone  league 
one-day  game  with the visitors being shot out  for  34.  Dani's 
figures  on that occasion were an astonishing 5-1-7-5. A  similar 
burst here would ensure the West ending the Deodhar Trophy with a 
flourish.

The Wankhede Stadium is being readied for the first Test  against 
South Africa. The track is expected to act as the fore-runner  to 
a  new generation of `sporting' wickets being promised to  Indian 
cricket.  The behaviour of the pitch will only be a brief  taster 
as to what the groundstaff could dish out in less than a  month's 
time.

lThe  teams:  Central Zone (from):  Gyanendra  Pandey  (captain), 
Sanjay  Bangar,  Gagan  Khoda, Manoj  Mudgal,  Devendra  Bundela, 
Harvinder Sodhi, Jyoti Yadav, Jai Prakash Yadav, Amay  Khurasiya, 
Pritam Gandhe, P Krishnakumar, Murali Kartik, Anshu Jain,  Ashish 
Winston Zaidi, Syed Abbas Ali and Raja Ali.

West Zone: Nayan Mongia (captain), Ajit Bhoite, Zahir Khan, Wasim 
Jaffer,  Amol  Muzumdar,  Jatin Paranjpe,  Vinod  Kambli,  Nilesh 
Kulkarni,  Abhijit  Kale,  Sitanshu  Kotak,  Amit  Dani,   Rajesh 
Garsondia, Hitesh Parsanna and Nilesh Modi.
