
Stakes high for hopefuls


By Our Sports Reporter

PUNE,  JAN.  30. The Deodhar Trophy tournament seems  set  for  a 
grand  finale.  North Zone and South Zone lock horns in  what  is 
virtually the final.

Featuring  the  two players who have enhanced the  value  of  the 
tournament  by  their very presence - Ajay  Jadeja  and  Mohammad 
Azharuddin - and that too in the town of Professor D.B.  Deodhar, 
all combine to promise a memorable event on the domestic circuit.

With the Challenger tournament scheduled to be held at  Ahmedabad 
later  this month, which will again be some sort of  a  selection 
trial,  the  stakes  are  high.  The  teams  for  the  Challenger 
tournament  itself are to be announced on February 3,  for  which 
the performances here will have a direct bearing. The Indian team 
is bound to have some changes for the series against the visiting 
South  Africans, so each performance henceforth will be of  great 
value.

On  the  field  at the Nehru Stadium here will  be  two  balanced 
teams, with a host of players in the reckoning, apart from  Azhar 
and  Jadeja.  North  has on its  ranks  the  aggressive  Virender 
Sehwag, a consistent Pankaj Dharmani, and seamers Robin Singh and 
Amit Bhandari, who have been bowling well in a batsman- dominated 
tournament.

On  the other hand, South's opening batsman J. Arun  Kumar,  with 
two  centuries under his belt, left handed all-rounder S.  Sriram 
and  medium-pacers  T. Kumaran and Dodda Ganesh are the  ones  to 
look  out  for,  apart from the more  experienced  ones  like  S. 
Sharath, centurion in the last match.

The South team had a practice session this evening, with  captain 
Azharuddin  himself having a good `knock'. The South skipper  had 
not  yet decided the final XI for tomorrow's game, which he  said 
he would do in consultation with the selectors. ``I think it is a 
good  batting  wicket,  with  probably just  some  help  for  the 
seamers,'' said Azharuddin.

On the other hand, North captain Vikram Rathour felt there  would 
be help for the seamers only early in the day. ``There should  be 
something  in the turf for the seamers in the first half  or  one 
hour,'' said Rathour, waiting keenly for tomorrow's match.

``The  match  being  nothing less than a final,  we  are  looking 
forward to it with enthusiasm. Our team has been combining  well, 
and but for a slump in which we lost four quick wickets and  thus 
the  match  against  Central, we have  been  doing  well,''  said 
Rathour  after  his  team had `nets'  this  morning,  once  again 
without Jadeja. 

Though North too had not decided on the combination, chances  are 
that opener Ashu Dani would be brought back for left- arm  seamer 
Surinder Singh of Jammu and Kashmir. 

The  teams  (from): North Zone: Vikram  Rathour  (captain),  Ashu 
Dani,  Pankaj  Dharmani,  Ajay Jadeja,  Virender  Sehwag,  Mithun 
Manhas,  Dinesh  Mongia,  Vijay  Dahiya,  Rajeev  Nayyar,   Rahul 
Sanghvi,  Sarandeep Singh, Robin Singh, Amit  Bhandari,  Surinder 
Singh, Rahul Panta.

South  Zone: Mohammad Azharuddin (captain), S. Sharath,  J.  Arun 
Kumar, A. Nandakishore, S. Sriram, Hemang Badani, Reuben Paul, S. 
Mahesh, Aashish Kapoor, T. Kumaran, Sreekumar Nair, Dodda Ganesh, 
N. Madhukar, N.P. Singh, Thilak Naidu.
