
Kasparov assured of title


By Arvind Aaron

WIJK  AAN ZEE, JAN. 30. Garry Kasparov, the Russian World  No.  1 
made  accurate  moves and forced team-mate  Vladimir  Kramnik  to 
split  points  on Saturday to retain his title he won  here  last 
year.

Although  not  as convincing as last year,  Kasparov  was  always 
ahead on the points table and the challenge from his main  rivals 
fell short of expectations. His score of 8.5 from 12 games can be 
matched by both Kramnik and Peter Leko 7.5, but the title here is 
shared  if points are equal. Kasparov is assured of at least  the 
shared  title  with a round to spare. He faces  Judit  Polgar  of 
Hungary  in the final round. Leko and Kramnik play Michael  Adams 
and Loek van Wely, but with the black pieces. 

Suffering  from flu, Viswanathan Anand took a quick draw  against 
Jeroen Piket of the Netherlands in the 12th round indicating that 
he had lost interest in the Corus chess tournament 2000 after  it 
became clear that he could not catch up with leader Kasparov.  He 
took  just  three  minutes for the entire  game.  Piket,  playing 
white,  faced the Slav defence from the Indian and the  game  was 
over  in  17  moves  while  still  in  a  well-known  theoretical 
position.Kasparov  achieved  the result he hoped  for  today.  He 
needs a draw in his last match for the unshared title and a  full 
share of the 20,000 guilders (Rs. 4 lakhs) prize money. There  is 
appearance  money  in addition which is normally  not  disclosed. 
Kasparov's range is $ 50,000-75,000 per event and the first  item 
of  the  contract he signs with the organisers is  that  the  fee 
should not be disclosed.

The  results  (twelfth round): Judit Polgar (Hun)  drew  with  V. 
Korchnoi  (Swz), P. Leko (Hun) drew L. Van Wely (Ned),  J.  Piket 
(Ned)  drew  with V. Anand (Ind), V. Kramnik (Rus) drew  with  G. 
Kasparov  (Rus),  J.  Timman (Ned) bt  A.  Morozevich  (Rus),  P. 
Nikolic  (Bih) bt M. Adams (Eng), S. Lputian (Arm) drew  with  N. 
Short (Eng).

The  standings (after round 12): 1. G. Kasparov 8.5/12,  2-3:  V. 
Kramnik,  P.  Leko  7.5 each, 4: V. Anand 7, 5-7:  M.  Adams,  A. 
Morozevich, J. Piket 6.5 each, 8-9: P. Nikolic, J. Timman 6 each, 
10-11: Judit Polgar, N. Short 5 each, 12: S. Lputian 4.5, 13:  V. 
Korchnoi 4, 14: L. Van Wely 3.5.
