
Ealham revives England's hopes


By Ted Corbett

KIMBERLEY,  JAN. 30. That subtle medium pace bowler Mark  Ealham, 
tip  toeing to the wicket like a cartoon cat ready to  pounce  on 
the  Zimbabwe  mouse, revived England's hopes of a place  in  the 
final of the triangular tournament with a match-winning five lbws 
for 15 today. It was his best bowling and England's finest in 300 
one-day Internationals.

Bowlers  of Ealham's pace usually need a friendly pitch to  wreck 
havoc, but he had the benefit of a compliant umpire instead.  Not 
that Dave Orchard gave any decision which did not pass  scrutiny, 
but there are those umpires who, having got out of the wrong side 
of the bed, might have felt that once they had given two or three 
decisions in Ealham's favour they had better turn down the rest. 

Orchard,  watching Ealham's wicket-to-wicket deliveries with  the 
admiration he might reserve for one of the local diamonds, raised 
his  finger  regularly  and without hesitation  as  the  Zimbabwe 
batsmen put up one of their feeblest displays. All too often  the 
batsmen  groped  forward  to offer their pads  where  their  bats 
should  have been; and all five decisions were ``plumb''  if  you 
will forgive the Orchard pun.

When England lost the toss for the fourth time in a row we feared 
it  might  be outbatted and those concerns were  almost  realised 
when  Ealham  had Grant Flower lbw, third man out for 73  in  the 
21st  over.  From that moment Ealham turned the  innings  into  a 
retreat.  Using the unvarying method of getting in close  to  the 
wicket and bowling straight he had Andy Flower in the 25th  over, 
Stuart  Carlisle and Guy Whittal in three balls of the  27th  and 
Murray  Goodwin  in  the 29th. Each time the  crowd  greeted  the 
decision  with  a rising crescendo of disbelief. In 24  balls  he 
took  five for eight and at the same time went 18 minutes and  26 
balls without conceding a run.

Ealham  is  the  same  tubby lad who  came  to  Zimbabwe  at  the 
beginning of the year, but he developes remarkable power from the 
same  short  legs that carry him too slowly  round  the  boundary 
edge.  He got from his father, Alan, the knowledge  and  patience 
gained in 20 years of cricket, also as a professional with Kent. 

``He's just a good cricketer,'' Alec Stewart once said to me  and 
that  sums  up his commonsense approach to every  aspect  of  his 
game.

Zimbabwe was saved from the disgrace of a score of about 125 by a 
22-over  partnership of 63 between John Rennie and  Heath  Streak 
for  the eighth wicket but when they had completed their  innings 
of  161 the match was virtually finished. Victory meant  that  it 
now  has to win only one more game to qualify for the  final  but  
there was a more important aspect of this success.

England  showed once again that it can fight back after a  defeat 
as  humiliating  as  the one against Zimbabwe  in  Cape  Town  on 
Friday; it has been its outstanding characteristic on this  tour. 
Coach Duncan Fletcher refused to panic - although he dropped that 
unlucky  batsman, Chris Adams, whose international career is  now 
history  - and indeed at an airport interview on Saturday  simply 
emphasised his side's lack of experience. 

He  hinted  that  some had better learn  quickly  but  as  Nasser 
Hussain  and  Nick Knight eased them towards  victory  in  bright 
sunshine  - England is clearly more at ease in the  daytime  than 
under lights, a rare experience for it - his hope that the  older 
men would lead the way also came true.

For the second Sunday match in a row they put together a  century 
stand  and - after Alistair Campbell had to take over  from  Andy 
Flower  behind  the wicket - England raced to  victory  by  eight 
wickets  with 18 overs left. It was as one-sided as Mike  Tyson's 
win  against Julius Francis on Saturday night and it should  mark 
the first genuine improvement in England's results after its best 
tour for ten years.
