
Andre Agassi's dream run continues


By Nirmal Shekar

MELBOURNE,  JAN.30. The dream merchant could not be  denied.  The 
man  whose hands set fantasies in motion on a tennis court,  like 
the  game  machines in a neon-lit casino in his hometown  of  Las 
Vegas, is dreaming on, and an extraordinary saga in modern tennis 
is keeping millions of other dreams alive too.

If,  for Andre Agassi, the last eight months of his  career  must 
seem  like  a dream in which everything happens in  slow  motion, 
where  everything is just perfect, then the balding 29- year  old 
genius  has  managed to slam the alarm shut everytime  there  has 
been an attempt to wake him up from his reverie.

In the final of the Australian Open at the Rod Laver Arena  here, 
today, what Yevgeny Kafelnikov, the defending champion,  produced 
was  no  more than a short, shrill cry. ``Shut up,''  screamed  a 
mildly  irritated Agassi, as he rubbed his eyes, rolled over  and 
went back into his long reverie.

And the first set surprise was just what Agassi needed,  perhaps, 
to  keep  on dreaming as he quickly matched the  demands  of  the 
occasion for a 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-4 victory that gave him not  only 
his  second  Australian Open title but, more  significantly,  his 
third Grand Slam championship in eight months and his sixth major 
career title (not counting the Olympic gold at Atlanta).

About  the only time that Agassi, the first man to play  in  four 
successive Grand Slam finals since Rod Laver in 1969, was  rudely 
shaken off his dream was in the Wimbledon final last summer  when 
the greatest of 'em all produced a virtual tour de force to  shut 
him out in three sets.

But,  in  this  tournament, once Agassi saw off  a  hobbled  Pete 
Sampras in a memorable semifinal match on Thursday night, a title 
victory  seemed  nothing  more than a  formality  for  the  world 
champion.

Yet,  on a lovely summer afternoon, it took some doing,  although 
Kafelnikov did not have the equipment - either mental or physical 
-  to  pose  Agassi the sort of problems he  encountered  in  the 
penultimate round.

Then again, when Agassi is playing the best tennis of his career, 
there  is only one active player who can strip him of  his  royal 
robes  and  make  him  look like a commoner -  that  man  is  now 
convalescing from a hip flexor injury at home in Los Angeles.

Looking  back,  when  he  lost  in  the  fourth  round  of   this 
championship  last year to a journeyman called Vincent Spadea  in 
the  fourth round, if you had put in $100 with TAB Sportsbet  for  
Agassi to win three out of the next four Grand Slam titles, you'd 
be the owner of a small fortune today.

Then again, if you had Nostradamus-like skills and had used  them 
a  year  ago to suggest to Agassi that he'd do what he  has  done 
since  the  last  championship and now, the  Nevadan  might  have 
laughed at you.

Really,  of all the many twists and turns in the remarkable  life 
and career of Andre Agassi, nothing has been quite as astonishing 
- almost undoable - as this spectacular streak of successes which 
began  at  the French Open last June when he came back  from  two 
sets down to beat Andrei Medvedev in the final.

``This  is what makes it all worth it. To win a Grand Slam  title 
is  very special and to do it here, in front of  a  knowledgeable 
tennis  crowd  is  even  better,'' said  Agassi  who,  after  the 
presentation, thanked his coach Brad Gilbert and his trainer  Gil 
Reyes but said nothing about the lady who has been courtside  for 
every  one of his seven matches here, sharing his highs and  lows 
with him - a certain Steffi Graf.

``Brad and Gil are guys who help me with my profession. Steffi is 
not going to confuse things. Some things are scared. It's not for 
the  world. Our relationship is for us,'' said Agassi when  asked 
later why he did not mention Graf during the presentation.

In front of a crowd of 16,004 fans - many of them kept  sweatered 
up  by an unusually chilly Melbourne summer day - Agassi  started 
on  the wrong foot, or, to be more precise, his opponent  started 
on the right foot.

With  a vicious array of criss-crossing winners on  both  flanks, 
Kafelnikov  opened up a 4-0 lead in the first set in front of  an 
awe-struck audience. But Agassi came back strongly to come within 
a service game of knotting up the set before the Russian broke to 
5-3 and then served out the first set.

But it was clear from midway in the first set itself that  Agassi 
was  quickly  shifting  gears and by the time  the  second  moved 
towards a climax, the top seed was at his very best, splicing and 
splintering the sidelines with beautifully concocted winners.

``That's  the aspect of the game where he has improved a lot.  It 
is amazing how Andre can recover,'' said Kafelnikov. ``After  the 
first  set  he  picked  up  his  game  and  played  a  lot   more 
consistently,'' he said.

From  3-3 in the second set, Agassi reeled off seven games  in  a 
row  and his opponent, who had looked like a Ferrari race car  at 
the start, now found out that the radiator was boiling. Not  only 
was  Agassi  hitting some blistering passes but  he  was  playing 
quite  a few delightful drop shots to tease the Russian  who  was 
mostly operating from two or three feet behind the baseline.

Although  Kafelnikov ended the streak by holding serve to 1-4  in 
the third, the momentum had swung and the match had been won  and 
lost in the minds of the competitors already.

With  his brilliant and remorseless shotmaking, the man from  Las 
Vegas took a firm grip on the match as he confidently served  out 
the  third set and then after a brief interlude - a man in  black 
clothes  and  a face mask jumped in from the  crowd  and  started 
shooting  with  a video camera before he was hustled out  by  the 
security  guards - broke Kafelnikov's serve for an early lead  in 
the fourth.

Kafelnikov  put  up some resistance towards the end  as  he  held 
serve  to 3-4 in the longest game of the match - nine deuces  and 
four breakpoints - but serving for the championship, Agassi fired 
three  of his nine aces in the match and there was  nothing  that 
the Russian could do to stop the world No.1.

``It's  been crazy,'' said Agassi, talking about his  Grand  Slam 
streak.  ``It  takes  a lot out of you. You  have  to  win  seven 
matches.  But it gives you a lot too. You realise what  the  hard 
work is all about,'' he said.

``In  hindsight,  I  have to go back to the round of  16  in  the 
French Open last year. I was down 6-4, 4-1 to (Carlos) Moya but I 
refused  to  cave in. I fought back and I started to  believe  in 
myself.  I  let my game fly,'' said Agassi when  asked  what  the 
turning point was last year.

Earlier in the afternoon, Jared Palmer from the United States and 
Australia's  Rennae Stubbs beat Todd Woodbridge  (Australia)  and 
Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario (Spain) 7-5, 7-6(3) in the mixed  doubles 
final.

For  Stubbs, it was her second title in three days. She  had  won 
the  women's  doubles on Friday in the company of  American  Lisa 
Raymond.  ``If you had told me I would win two Grand Slam  titles 
coming in here, I would have said, `Yeah, right!'`` said Stubbs.

But  the success in the doubles on Friday certainly helped  boost 
Stubbs' confidence and she played a very good match today even as 
Palmer served superbly and volleyed wonderfully well.

The results: (all finals):

Men's  singles: 1-Andre Agassi (U.S.) beat  2-Yevgeny  Kafelnikov 
(Russia) 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-4.

Mixed  doubles: Jared Palmer (U.S.) and Rennae Stubbs (Aus)  beat 
Todd Woodbridge (Aus) and Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario (Spain) 7-5, 7-
6(3).

Boys  singles: Andy Roddick (U.S.) beat Mario Ancic (Croatia)  7-
6(2),6-3. 

Girls  singles: Aniko Karpos (Hungary) beat Maria  Jose  Martinez 
(Spain) 6-2, 3-6, 6-2.
