
Making magic with strings


IT  WAS  a rare sight on stage in Chennai - a  guitar  legend  in 
concert with a brilliant violin maestro.

Together,  Larry Coryell and Dr. L. Subramaniam created magic  at 
the  Music Academy on the Republic day evening. You did not  have 
to  be a learned musician to realise that great music  was  being 
rendered  there;  though  both  demand  quite  a  bit  from   the 
discerning listener.

And  that  was  not all. Dr. L. brought his  newly  wedded  wife, 
Kavitha  Krishnamoorthy (now Subramaniam) on stage and his  three 
children too, for a short while. 

There was Robert J.Rodriguez on the drums. All this in under  two 
hours at the Lakshminarayana Global Music Festival. Heady stuff.

Larry  and Dr. L. both, top in their leagues, generated  a  great 
deal  of  heat  in their playing. On  display  was  their  famed, 
dazzling techniques and crafty use of space.

It  was a coming together of two people who had known each  other 
for  more  than three decades. Chennai is home to  one  of  them. 
``This concert is very special to me. I was born here and spent a 
large  part of my early life here. My father taught me  my  first 
lessons,''  said Dr. L. At the end of the concert,  the  standing 
ovation seemed to never cease. 

``Coming  back  here  to this welcome and  love  gives  me  great 
pleasure. What more can I ask for,'' he asked. ``This recognition 
in  my home town, I will remember for a very long time  to  come. 
This  is  also my first appearance with my wife  on  stage,''  he 
added.

Larry  Coryell  is in Chennai a second time - he  has  been  here 
earlier in 1982 - at the Madras University for a Sakthi  concert. 
He  came in place of John McLaughlin, another guitar legend,  who 
met with an accident then. 

``The  only  thing  I  remember about that  trip  is  that  Zakir 
(Hussain), with whom I was supposed to play with did not turn  up 
till  the  near end of the concert. And when he came in,  he  had 
worn a collar to support his neck. He apparently was filming  for 
a movie and sprained his neck,'' he recalls.

Last Thursday, Larry found time to jam with some city  guitarists 
at The Trident. For the struggling city musicians, he held  words 
of hope. 

``I  was  like anyone of you. Struggles to subsist  is  part  and 
parcel of coming up. Finally, if you want something real bad  and 
work  towards  it,  you  will get it. I can  tell  that  from  my  
experience,'' he told them.

And it is an experience that many derive inspiration from.  Larry 
moved  to  New  York from Galveston, Texas, in  1965.  He  played 
behind  guitarist  Gabor Szabo in drummer Chico  Hamilton's  Jazz 
quintet there. 

The next year, he replaced Szabo and founded one of the  earliest 
Jazz-rock bands, The Free Spirits. By 1969, his first solo LP was 
out  and he had toured Europe and U.S. ``Looking back,  it  seems 
everything could have happened only this way because I wanted  it 
to  be  this way. It was difficult. From Texas to New  York,  the 
route was never easy,'' he added.

Larry  has  played alongside the very best  guitarists  around  - 
McLaughlin,  Eric  Clapton, Jimi Hendrix, Paco de  Lucia,  Al  Di 
Meola,  and many more. In between there was  shortlived  European 
tour with Paco and McLaughlin, in 1979-80. 

``Guitar's  super  trio,''  as they were  known,  celebrated  the 
meeting of spirits with a video at the Royal Albert Hall.

By  the  nineties, his place as a fusion pioneer and  a  seasoned 
musical traveller between the worlds of rock, Jazz, classical and 
Brazilian rhythms, was firmly cemented. 

In  the  mid-nineties,  he  took part  in  a  concert  in  Spain, 
spotlighting  32 of the world's finest guitarists,  including  BB 
King,  Keith Richards, Robie Robertson and Bob Dylan.  ``Oh  that 
was a wonderful experience,'' he recalls.

The  last word: The Rolling Stone Jazz Record Guide (1985)  notes 
that though Coryell is one of the most creative and  accomplished 
modern electric guitarists, he has never been as popular as  many 
less capable but better promoted musicians.

(R. K. Radhakrishnan)
