
With a touch of histrionics


HOLIDAYING IN Chennai with her parents who live here, Vayu  Naidu 
is  taking  a break from her engrossing work  with  "theatre"  in 
England.  Her passion for story-telling is so complete  that  she 
never misses an opportunity to share her experience with others - 
specially  children. I saw her one afternoon, keeping a group  of 
children  riveted  by her histrionics. She made  them  eventually 
understand the essential elements of theatre, by coaxing them  to 
speak with their voices, their bodies.

Vayu  Naidu is currently director of the Asian theatre  programme 
at  the  Leicester  Haymarket  Theatre  in  the  U.K.  The  Asian 
population of Leicester is projected to double in the next decade 
to  cater to this group and to draw a multicultural  response  to 
theatre,  this  well  appointed mainstream  theatre  complex  has 
initiated a special project to encourage Asian talent. Vayu heads 
what  she named "Natah" after taking over as director in 1998.  A 
strong peripheral activity of Natah is music and dance. The  core 
activity   is  to  produce  plays  for  Asians  by  Asians.   The 
explorative  agenda includes looking to the parent countries,  be 
it  Asia  or Africa for traditional inputs. "I have  recruited  a 
young Asian to be the director of the Asian youth theatre",  says 
Vayu. They are looking forward to staging Badal Sircar's  "Beyond 
the land of Hattamala". Even the design for the production is  by 
an  Asian  student  Niti Gupta.  Vayu's  involvement  extends  to 
commissioning  new works. In the studio which seats  120  persons 
called  Peacock, she staged Tim Murari's "Circle in the  Square". 
"It has the ideal intimacy of an Indian amphitheatre", she says.

With  enthusiasm, Vayu enumerates the different projects  she  is 
planning.  One big event would be a new play by Girish Karnad  in 
the Fall.

Vayu's  talents include writing. Her play, "There comes a  Karma" 
won  a  prize when it was featured on Radio 4. Inspired  by  J.M. 
Synge's  "Playboy  of the Western World", Vayu wrote  "Krishna  - 
Playboy of the Asian World", where she explores new angles in the 
human  struggle to achieve divine Love. A Gujarati councillor  in 
Leicester  did  not  see eye to eye with the  author  and  raised 
objections.  However,  Vayu  "got a good  buzz"  from  the  Asian 
community at large and feels encouraged about her work.

Vayu Naidu is at the centre of what she loves doing - all aspects 
of the theatre keep her involved. And visiting Chennai, she  does 
the  social  whirl, dressed elegantly. This attractive  woman  is 
never too busy to miss an opportunity to tell a story!

LAKSHMI VISWANATHAN
