
Mind can be controlled by meditation


CHENNAI,  JAN.  31.  Meditation is a  universal  tradition  which 
traces its origin thousands of years before the advent of today's 
civilisation.   The   science   of   meditation   has    survived 
uninterrupted  and  exhaustive  testing as  it  has  passed  from 
generation  to  generation. It has endured in its  original  form 
because  its  outstanding  and  fundamental  appeals  relate   to 
universality, simplicity and tolerance. If one can understand its 
four  paths,  it  is  possible  to  unravel  the  trappings   and 
mysterious elements of any religious or philosophical system.

Real  meditation  is liberation from the clutches  of  the  lower 
senses  and  the  mind. By definition, it is a  state  where  all 
fears,  desires, longings and negative emotions are  transcended. 
The meditator reaches the superconscious level in which he or she 
is  able to identify with the all-Blissful Self, at  which  stage 
there  is  no awareness of body or mind. The  vibrations  of  the 
Mantra  which she or he utters at that time has direct effect  on 
the  energy-centres  of the body. The mantra  steadies  the  mind 
leading  to  the stillness of meditation. Without  its  aid,  one 
cannot  grow  into  the  divine state.  Without  it,  one  cannot 
liberate  oneself  from  the  trammels of  the  mind  and  attain 
immortality. 

There  are certain classic questions which almost everyone  muses 
at  some  time  in life. ``Who am I'', ``What is  my  purpose  in 
life,'' ``Why do some people seem to have an easier time of  life 
than others'' and ``Where did I come from and where am I  going'' 
are  a  few  among them just to mention. Those who  are  able  to 
discover  the answer will remain contented. The meaning  of  life 
can  be  found  only  by diving  deep,  deep  within,  for  which 
meditation helps as it is the practice by which there is constant 
observance of the mind, explained Swami Vimalananda in a lecture. 
Man  gets caught in frustration and problems. It is  the  express 
purpose  of  meditation to create new positive  channels  in  the 
mind.

Good  and  evil, friend and enemy are in the mind  only.  Through 
meditation,  the  mind is brought to a halt and  focussed  on  an 
adorable object. Several guidelines have been laid for practising 
this difficult task of meditating without getting distracted from 
external agencies. A person who meditates can turn out more  work 
in less time. He will experience peace within. A great Hindu holy 
man was once insulted in front of his disciples by a non-believer 
who spat upon him several times. Not one muscle twitched nor  did 
his  calm  facial expression change because he did  not  identify 
with his physical sheath. His mind was absolutely centred on God. 
Restraint of thought waves does not mean suppression of emotions. 
They are only sublimated. 
