
Sculptural dialogue


DIALOGUE AND duality are the key words to understanding the works 
of the German sculptor and photographer Ernst Hesse. Born in  the 
city of Dusseldorff "which has a big tradition of fine arts",  he 
studied  art as a natural choice, but changed over from  painting 
to sculpture in the third year of the course as painting did  not 
satisfy his urge for three-dimensional work.

"I  arrived at the concept of dialogue and duality when  I  moved 
out  of  Germany along with eight other artists and went  to  Los 
Angeles  to  hold an exhibition". Moving out of  the  studios  in 
Dusseldorf was deliberate - the artists wanted to visit different 
countries, work with artists in other fields and have a  dialogue 
about  their cultures. They came to realise that all artists  had 
their problems but two issues that really bound them to  together 
were that of survival in the midst of adverse conditions and  the 
question of relating themselves to society.

Thus  began  the dialogue and duality was a  concept  that  Hesse 
worked  out  in his personal work. As the  artist  travelled,  he 
became  fascinated by the sculptures of medieval Europe  and  the 
ancient Asian sculptures of Borobudur and Angkor Vat. "I began to 
study   interactive   art  and   architecture   and   inevitably, 
architectural  qualities  began  to be  reflected  in  my  works. 
Parallel to the internal exchange between my artistic vision  and 
the  influence  of  new places and people",  is  the  dialogue  I 
desired to viewers to have with my sculptures."

Working with people who come from different sections the society, 
gathering  ideas  out of this experience and dualising  them  has 
been  one  of  the most fascinating periods of  his  work  as  an 
artist. "If all people walked, I just wanted to stand quiet -  if 
all  of  them screamed, I just wanted to be silent. I  wanted  to 
give  people, through my work, a sense of quietness and take  the 
noise  out  of  their  lives. My  sculptures  in  cast  iron  and 
sometimes  in bronze are just a medium to bring people  to  their 
senses.  I build a story through my sculptures to allow people  a 
crossover  - a chance to look at themselves, realise  themselves, 
and  transport  them to a different world that  has  silence  and 
peace."  The concept of duality is most keenly perceived  in  the 
artist's modern, abstract shapes, contrasting with the old-world, 
elegant colour of the sculptures.

Though  he rejected painting early in his art life, it  has  come 
back now in the form of photo-works. He composes the phographs as 
paintings, using various developing techniques, materials such as 
brush  and paper and the interplay of light to achieve  aesthetic 
images. He uses the photo-works as a diversion from sculpture and 
in  addition has created a series of abstract drawings in  strong 
shades  of blue and black. Ernst Hesse, who has been a  full-time 
sculptor  for  22 years, will be displaying all his works  at  an 
exhibition at the Lalit Kala Akademi, Chennai from February 5  to  
11,  2000,  which  is presented by the Max  Mueller  Bhavan.  The 
artist will be present at the exhibition.

ANJALI SIRCAR
