
Madras Miscellany


S. MUTHIAH

All the world's a stage

THE invitation I had received from the Booksellers' & Publishers' 
Association of South India was for a function honouring Prof.  M. 
S. Swaminathan and for the release of the book, "Dance of Sarus," 
a collection of essays by S. Theodore Baskaran. The promise of an 
introduction  by Shekhar Dattari, the wildlife film-maker  making 
an  international name for himself, was an added  attraction.  If 
the whole function was over by 7-30 p.m. as I had anticipated,  I 
would  still  have time to pop across the road and  greet  Geetha 
Krishnankutty,  who  was being felicitated for  winning  a  major 
award for India's best translation effort for 1999. Man proposes, 
unfortunately...

...  And  so I found the whole programme, at the  annual  BAPASI 
function,  overwhelming  all my carefully made  plans.  Honouring 
Prof.  Swaminathan went off as scheduled, though for the life  of 
me I cannot think of what more honour you can bestow on a  person 
who  has  been  judged one of the top three Asians  of  the  20th 
Century  and who, arguably, is the greatest Indian of the  latter 
half  of  that century. Such eminence does  not  need  ponnadais, 
garlands and citations; it needs only reverence. But if a tamasha 
BAPASI felt it needed to have, so be it. But why the surprise  of 
the evening that followed, the sudden programme change?

A book by one senior police officer was released by an even  more 
senior  officer. The Tamil publication by Radhakrishnan  recalled 
the months he spent in England learning as much from the Scotland 
Yard  experience  as from the courtesies of the  bobbies  on  the 
beat. Even more enjoyably, it gave him the opportunity to breathe 
the  very  air that Shakespeare, Shelley and  Wordsworth  of  his 
English   Literature   youth   had   breathed.   Savouring   this 
appreciatively was Dr. Ravi Arumugam, scholar, student of law and 
senior  police officer whose eloquence in both Tamil and  English 
seems  better suited for the bar and more so for the  Bench  than 
policing.

If  that was all that there had been to it, all would  have  been 
well. But no sooner had Radhakrishnan finished his response  than 
the  stage was taken over by his fans, each intent  on  honouring 
with  ponnadai and garlands, the two officers and some others  on 
the stage as well. Then the mike was taken over for a citation or 
two... and I and a few others were way behind schedule. But  even 
if  we were not was this unplanned spectacle  necessary?  BAPASI, 
whose splendid efforts make possible this annual fair to  promote 
the reading habit, had, I think, those efforts rather dampened  a 
bit that evening.

* * *

Handing over the baton

BOYISH-LOOKING  Shekhar Dattari, whose successful film on  Silent 
Valley  he  is  now following up by following  the  Monsoons  for 
Discovery, eventually got his chance to make his contribution  at 
the  BAPASI function. He evocatively described the beauty of  the 
dance  of the Sarus cranes in their thousands in the  waterbodies 
of  Rajasthan, but stressed that the commitment of the  male  and 
the  female  was uniquely a lifelong one, once  they  found  each 
other  after the mating dance. And that was the  significance  of 
titling  the book "Dance of Sarus," being as it was a  reflection 
of Theodore Baskaran's lifelong commitment to wildlife study  and 
conservation.  Baskaran  in turn made another  symbolic  gesture, 
when  he requested that the first copy released be  presented  to 
his  nephew  Dayalan  as  a symbolic passing  on  of  the  baton. 
Dayalan,  son  of  Theodore's elder brother, is a  chip  off  the 
family  block, not only displaying the same love for  Nature  but 
even  to following Theodore's sartorial style, their  jibbas  and 
churidars having the same distinctive cut.

Wildlife  is only one of Theodore Baskaran's many interests.  The 
Tamil film is another and his "Eye on the Serpent," taking a look 
at  several old Tamil films, won a National award last year.  But 
to  me, a much more important book, in fact, a book I would  rate 
as  one  of the most significant, if not the most,  published  in 
Madras  in  the  last  25 years,  is  his  "Message  Bearers,"  a 
perceptive  study  of how the political movements in  Tamil  Nadu 
used  the stage and the screen in their evolution. It is  a  book 
now  out of print, but deserves not only to be re-printed but  to 
be read by every student of history and politics in the country.

Yet  another interest of Baskaran is the world of  Tamil  letters 
and the tales the letters tell of Tamil society. By curating  the 
Roja  Muthiah  Chettiar Library in Mogappair,  Theodore  has  got 
exactly the work he had targeted to enjoy in his retirement.  The 
Roja  Muthiah collection, rescued from obscurity in Chettinad  by 
the  University of Chicago's generosity, is now the nucleus of  a 
library that promises to become a major research centre for Tamil 
social studies.

An equally significant step to conserve our heritage was taken by 
Theodore  Baskaran  the  Postmaster-General  shortly  before   he 
retired. The Electric, owned by Warwick Major and Reginald  Eyre, 
was  the first hall built in Madras for a cinema theatre  and  in 
this  "Large corrugated shell with a brick facade"  was  screened 
silent  films from 1913. The hall became an office block  of  the 
Mount  Road  Post Office in 1915 and remained one  till  Theodore 
rescued it in 1998 by having it restored and refurbished. It  has 
since functioned as a well-kept Philatelic Bureau and  Philatelic 
Exhibition  Hall.  But  it  deserves  greater  visibility  to  be 
recognised as the landmark it is.

* * *

Slowly, slowly to the stars 

IT WAS in one of my other guises I unexpectedly found myself at a 
'kick-off' function recently midst jargon such as TQM and TPM and 
QCs.  All  a foreign language to me, I was soon at sea  with  it. 
Curiously,  the language I found easiest to understand  was  that 
used  by the Japanese trainer, Sueo Yamaguchi, who was doing  the 
'kicking-off'  and  who,  I  was told, was  a  trainer  from  the 
Japanese  Institute of Plant Maintenance, was creating  waves  in 
the country.

At the function, I did manage to gather that TPM stood for  Total 
Plant Maintenance and that using the wisdom on this subject  that 
Yamaguchi-san had preached, a pioneering group in this plant  was 
doing wonderful things. Man after man and a woman or two too came 
on  stage and, in what struck me as being similar to an  American 
Bible Belt confessional, poured forth their fabulous achievements 
in a colourful blaze of numbers.

Then Yamaguchi-san took over - and not only did he begin to  pour 
a  bit of cold water on the proceedings, but also began  to  make 
much more sense to even a non-believer like me. Demonstrating  on 
the stage with high bounds and gentle measured steps, he advised, 
to  the  accompaniment of a cheering  plant,  "methuva,  methuva; 
koncham,  koncham!" Do not set very high targets in a very  short 
time,  take  it  a  step at a time,  he  explained  his  prancing 
performance  to the managers. At the beginning, do not  target  a 
sharp  rise  in performance, make it gradual but ensure  that  it 
steadily improves, he urged his listeners.

The  second  point he made was about the assessment he  had  just 
seen.  "Remember you've done it in-house. You want the  world  to 
say it, not yourself!" And he concluded to more cheers, this time 
even  from the managers but not the boss-man, "No TPM 24 hours  a 
day. Think TPM 100 per cent in factory, not at all in the  home." 
And Yamaguchi-san play-acted his advice to the words, "Many women 
working  in  this  plant. They going home and  cooking.  If  they 
thinking  TPM  all  the time, they cutting the  finger,  not  the 
carrot!" And as laughter almost brought the house down, I had the 
feeling he had with his delightful pragmatism done more to 'kick-
start'  TPM  at  this  plant  than  all  the  other  Indian-style 
outpourings on stage.
