
Going beyond the tamasha


To  students,  culturals mean more than mere fun  and  enjoyment, 
says MALATHI RANGARAJAN.

INTROVERTED? INHIBITED? Self conscious? Shy? Then surely you  are 
not  a  person who has stepped out of school or  college  in  the 
recent past... right?

Even as you wonder how today's youngster is invariably completely 
sure  of  himself,  you also realise  that  neither  college  nor 
academics can make one a picture of such supreme self-confidence. 
College  is a grooming yard, no doubt but the cultural  festivals 
that  are  open to all students offer excellent fora  for  hidden 
talents  and  skills  to blossom.  They  bring  the  quick-witted 
introvert out of his shell, help hone his myriad capabilities and 
send him out as a youngster who is cool, confident and raring  to 
go.

Actually,  today's schools provide a firm ground for students  as 
cultural events begin at the higher secondary level itself.

Some of us who have seen girls and boys in schools walk past with 
a  self-conscious smile and a gawky gait, have been surprised  at 
the  transformation in their mindset when they are for the  first 
time exposed to the school and college mela that go by the common 
name, culturals.

The  events that are conceived, modified, improved  and  bettered 
with  every year, seem to have something for everyone to  eagerly 
take part in. The cultural fiesta of a college or school may bear 
a  different name but event wise, the similarities are  many.  At 
the  school  level, "Rhapsody",  "Razzmatazz",  "Reverberations", 
"Renaissance" and "Genesis" spell fun, frolic and excitement  for 
the students. In college, the craze reaches zenithal levels  with 
culturals  such as "Srishti". But the crescendo is  reached  with 
"Saarang".  Much  has been said about  this  prestigious,  event-
filled mela.

Padma  Sriram, who is just out of college, feels that in  school, 
the  quiet ones need a little extra goading and coaxing. "But  in 
college, suddenly all of us get enthusiastic and there is  hardly 
any need to cajole anyone into getting active. They already are."

Lavanya,  a student of SRM, is quite a quiet person but in  front 
of  the mike, she is the embodiment of self-assurance. She  is  a 
singer  who  was  seen  in  the  "Sapthaswarangal"  programme  on 
television.  "Participating  in  culturals is  something  that  I 
enjoy. As a singer... I only wish we are given more time to  set 
our instruments right," she smiles.

With every passing year, the events and the conduct of them  keep 
improving,  opines  Vinutha  Reddy,  a  second  year   Mechanical  
Engineering student. But another of the students, Alexander says, 
"I think in the recent past, it has been a plateau."

Probably  a little more imagination and efficiency in  management 
and  further  improvement in the standard of competitors  can  be 
seen in the following academic year.

"But as it is, the standard is excellent," says Shreeram  Somani, 
a  second  year Physics student of D.G. Vaishnav College.  He  is 
happy to bask in the festive ambience that these culturals, offer 
together with the challenges that the various competitions pose.

The  mood of the participants, their alert approach laced with  a 
casual outlook and the din created by an energetic audience are a 
treat to watch, especially in the quiz programmes.

Rahul, a second year Computer Science student from the  Hindustan 
Engineering College, is an avid quizzer, who never misses  inter-
college quizzes held as part of the culturals. "I may lose in the 
Prelims  itself  or  may move on but it matters  little.  I  love 
watching   a  quiz...  and  what  better  way  to  improve   your 
knowledge," he says.

Fun  and enjoyment are the perks you enjoy at culturals. But  for 
the  youth  they  are  more than just  that.  They  prove  to  be 
indispensable morale boosters and confidence builders too.
