
Between You and Me


CHENNAI

ON FRIDAY night, a friend who does not share my political  views, 
chortling in joy, asked me if I had heard the news. I had indeed, 
and  I cut him short as I did not want to engage in  an  argument 
which  I  was  sure  to  lose. The  subject  was  of  course  the 
announcement of the Tamil Maanila Congress that it would  support 
the AIADMK candidates in the forthcoming Assembly by-elections. I 
find  myself fairly tongue-tied. The one leader whom many  of  us 
admired  for his integrity, consistency and probity let  us  down 
with a bang. The excuse was that the secular forces should not be 
splintered.  What this means is that in the Lok  Sabha  elections 
the TMC could make no headway, and this time around the party  is 
going to support AIADMK as it is a secular party. Corruption? Who 
cares? The other reason given is the need to crusade against  the 
anti-people  dispensation  of the DMK in Tamil Nadu  and  at  the 
Centre.  Everything sounds specious. The Chief Minister of  Tamil 
Nadu  has said that not only he but the whole of Tamil  Nadu  was 
surprised  by  Mr.  G. K. Moopanar's decision to  go  along  with 
AIADMK.  It is all very well to say, as TMC is now  saying,  that 
this support is only for the present election. The AIADMK General 
Secretary is already claiming this move as a happy augury for the 
future.  I just have the feeling, however unworthy, that many  of 
the TMC followers are tired of being in the wilderness.

If  anybody  wants  my opinion I would simply say  that  the  TMC 
should  have sat it out. The DMK lost its public image,  fostered 
over 60 or 70 years, as the champion of secularism the moment  it 
aligned  with the BJP for rankly power-hungry reasons. And  under 
the inventive machinations of the Chief Minister, it has been  on 
an  unheard  of binge of populistic  activities.  Samatuvapurams, 
farmer's markets, the Thiruvalluvar statue (and Thiruvalluvar has 
been  squeezed  to the last drop possible),  handouts,  handouts, 
handouts  to all and sundry. Obviously the party is  not  looking 
ahead to the next month, but to the next years.

The  BJP, with which the DMK now seems to be bonded by  hoops  of 
steel,  goes  from  one  excess to another.  In  Gujarat  it  has 
declared that government employees may belong to the RSS which is 
the  third level of saffronisation. In the U.P.,  the  Government 
has taken control of the buildings of new places of worship.  The 
latest  from  U.P.  is the Chief  Minister's  statement  that  he 
perceived  no objection to a Rama temple in Ayodhya, if  it  were 
done  as peacefully as the destruction of the Babri  Masjid.  And 
the  latest is going along strictly by party lines, the  BJP  and 
its  satellites paying lip service to the  President's  carefully 
thought out remarks about the Constitution, and proceeding with a 
review  committee  anyway to study it for  possible  changes.  To 
quote  from  an old parody of the magazine Time's  style  in  its 
early years, ``Where it will all end, knows God.''

ON HOUSE Tax, the Corporation's stand that all assessees who  had 
submitted   property  returns  as  called  for  should  call   on 
respective Corporation offices to collect notices of revision  of 
taxes  caused  much protest. Such notices  should  apparently  be 
served on the assessee as required by Corporation rules. A reader 
writes:  ``To this day I have not received any notice  (from  the 
Corporation).  I  found  to my dismay, when going  to  the  Metro 
Office  for  paying  my  water-tax,  that  the  Corporation   had 
intimated  to them upward revision of my property tax,  based  on 
which my water-tax had been hiked correspondingly. It is  strange 
that  I  as  the  assesee have  not  received  any  communication 
whatever  from the Corporation.'' As several assessees may be  in 
the  same  predicament as the writer of the letter,  I  hope  the 
Corporation  has  an  acceptable justification  for  this  wholly 
unjustifiable action.

THE  PROBUS Club of Madras informs us that Aavin will  arrange  a 
free visit to their Sholinganallur plant for any group of  people 
who  would  like to see for themselves Aavin's sense  of  quality 
control,  and their focus on customer satisfaction.  Recently,  a 
group  sponsored by the Probus Club visited the  facilities,  and 
were given a very fine tour. The contact number is: PRO 4838150.

HERE  IS  a human interest story, though it may perhaps  be  more 
correct to call it an animal interest story. This reader acquired 
some  time ago a German Shepherd dog. Soon after he picked  up  a 
small  kitten in November 1999. Alas, the dog had no use for  the 
kitten  and used to chase it, and the kitten had to be  protected 
from the dog.

Came the millennium! Suddenly both buried their differences,  and 
became  so friendly that they now drink milk/water from the  same 
bowl.  The kitten bravely plays with the much bigger dog.  I  can 
vouch for this as the reader has sent the column a photograph  of 
the  animals  playing  together, taken on January  7,  2000.  The 
reader  concludes his letter with: ``If only people  and  nations 
can  sink their differences and live amicably, what a  place  the 
earth  would  be,  I wonder.'' May be it is  after  all  a  human 
interest story.

OBVIOUSLY I cannot mention the name of the multinational company, 
but  this should serve as a cautionary tale. The writer  of  this 
letter  needed  to have his cordless  telephone  repaired.  Being 
technically  expert himself he could have repaired it, but as  it 
was  a  sophisticated  instrument, he took  the  handset  to  the 
authorised repair centre of the parent company, and left if there 
to get an estimate. To his surprise, the estimate for the  repair 
was  quoted  at Rs. 1,000. He decided to  repair  the  instrument 
himself, and asked for it back, whereupon he was presented with a 
bill for Rs. 200 for inspection charges. ``They could not give me 
a  convincing  reply  as to what the service was  that  they  had 
offered  for  demanding that sum.'' He had no option but  to  pay 
what  they demanded. Eventually he repaired the handset  himself, 
changing  the receiver coil for Rs. 30. The moral of this  story, 
it seems to me, that to avoid the egregiousness of the demands of  
the authorised dealers of the multinational companies, one  might 
turn  to  the  many  locally-trained  mechanics  who  can  handle 
everything from light switches to TV sets.

IN  THE letters to this column Metro Water is getting  some  hard 
knocks.  There  are some grave suspicions about the  charges  for 
their  lorry  loads of water, and people wonder why  Metro  Water 
should  go  in for selling purified water, when  an  acute  water 
famine faces us.

THIS IS a subject on which any reader who has the information may 
kindly  share  it with the readers of the  column.  Apparently  a 
Tamil  newspaper  announced  that Government  has  sanctioned  an 
increase  of  5 per cent and above the existing  pension  to  all 
Central  Government pensioners. The correspondent says  that  his 
letter  to the Tamil newspaper has not been replied to, and  that 
this information has not appeared in TheHindu. The  correspondent 
further  states that many other pensioners are  eagerly  awaiting 
more information on the subject.

ACORRESPONDENT is annoyed by a big sign in Central Station to the 
effect:  Have you bought your ticket?'' He finds this  offensive, 
and  says that at the least it could say: Have you  brought  your 
ticket.''  I  don't  know. I think the  Railway  means  well.  As 
someone who frequently left his air travel ticket in hotel rooms, 
I  would be grateful for such a sign to remind me that I  haven't 
made  an  ass  of myself again. Again,  these  days,  when  train 
tickets  are available many days in advance, it would  be  fairly 
easy to leave one's tickets in another suit. Ah well, to each his 
own.

HERE  IS  a story, Parthasarathy, which a  reader  has  specially 
marked  for you. There were three passengers in an air plane -  a 
Bishop,  a  man  who was considered the greatest  genius  in  the 
country,  and  a  Boy  Scout. Suddenly the  pilot  warned  of  an 
impending crash. ``Unfortunately'' he said, ``we have only  three 
parachutes.  I must take one so that I can report  the  accident. 
``And  I  must have one,'' said the genius, ``because  I  have  a 
great contribution to make for mankind.'' And he jumped out  with 
the  pilot.  The Bishop turned to the Boy Scout. ``My  son,''  he 
said,  ``I've  had a long life. Yours lies ahead. Take  the  last 
parachute.  Good  luck and God bless.'' ``Don't you  worry,  your 
Grace,''  the Boy Scout said. ``We've got two parachutes. In  his 
hurry, the genius jumped with my holdall.''

S. KRISHNAN
