
They come with a tinkle


IT ALL began when she did not receive any card for her  birthday. 
A  dejected and disappointed Lakshmi decided to start a  business 
where   she  could  remind  people  of  birthdays   and   wedding 
anniversaries  of their near and dear ones and deliver  gifts  on 
their  behalf. Thus was born Thofah 'X'press Yourself,  a  unique 
relationship   service,   as  this   enterprising   26-year   old 
catagorises  her  venture.  One of its  kind,  Lakshmi  has  been 
running her venture successfully for the last two years.

Lakshmi,  who  was earlier involved in her family  business  (her 
father  and  brothers run the famed L'Man  School  of  Motoring), 
launched  this  personalised business in a small  way,  with  co-
operation from her family and friends. She also telemarketed  the 
idea  to  several  small  companies.  Initially  she  faced  some 
resistance,  but  slowly  people began to get back  to  her  with 
orders.

Soon  word  spread  and her business grew by  leaps  and  bounds, 
literally.  She  started getting orders  from  several  corporate 
houses  and now some of her high-profile clients include the  TVS 
Group and ACT Indian (Lancer division).

This  was  when  she  decided  on a  membership  fee  -  Rs.  300 
(individuals) and Rs. 500 (corporates) for half a year and double 
the amount as annual subscription.

But   how  does  she  actually  get  the  required   information? 
"Companies   maintain  a  database  for  birthdays  and   wedding 
anniversaries,  and  other  important days.  They  give  me  that 
database  which  I feed into my computer. Every month  I  keep  a 
check  on  the upcoming events and remind my  client.  Then  they 
allot  a  budget  for the gift which I buy  and  deliver  to  the 
concerned  party,"  she  explains. "As  far  as  individuals  are 
concerned,  they just call me up and give me the date on which  a 
gift has to be delivered and I do it."

Normally,  the clients give Lakshmi a free hand in the choice  of 
gifts,  "but there have been times where the client suggests  the 
gift." The charges are as per the actuals with 20 per cent  extra 
for service charges.

The  items  offered by Thofah include dry/fresh  flowers,  cakes, 
Sixth  Sense  potpourri, Archie's/Hallmark  products,  Tupperware 
products,  terracotta artefacts, hard leather goods, Hanung  soft 
toys,   wrought  iron  candle  stands,  Nightingale   stationery, 
Oriflame/Avon/Aviance  beauty products and fresh  fruit  baskets, 
which are often decorated with dry flowers.

On  special  occasions like Valentine's Day,  special  cakes  and 
bouquets are also delivered.

Lakshmi  has a network in place for executing orders in the  rest 
of the country and even abroad, though the gifts meant for people 
living  abroad  are  normally  restricted  to  flowers.  She  co-
ordinates  with her contacts through e-mail. Sometimes  when  the 
person  cannot  be reached through the network,  the  courier  is 
used. In such a case, Lakshmi sends only dry flowers.

A  recent  tie-up  with  satyamonline.com  has  helped  Lakshmi's 
business immensely. In fact, in just one month, she says she  has 
received  more than 40 orders, through the web. (The  address  is 
www.satyamonline.com/shopping/millenium/home.asp)

"But  all this would never have been possible without  the  solid 
and  silent  support of my husband Vikram," says Lakshmi  with  a 
glint  in  her  eyes. An architect  by  profession,  Vikram  also 
pitches in whenever possible.

So  next  time  you remember a friend's birthday  or  an  uncle's 
wedding  anniversary, but do not have the time to shop for  them, 
just pick up the phone and call Lakshmi at 4903188 or mail her at 
thofah@satyamonline.com.

SAVITHA PADMANABHAN
