
A brush with beauty


SHE TAKES out a slender brush from the vanity case with an air of 
nonchalance.  Her  20-plus client holds out her right  hand  with 
mixed  feelings  of joy and anxiety. With reassuring  warmth  she 
reaches  out for the young woman's fingers and begins to  indulge 
in her art - nail art.

Plain enamels, daring colours, varied finishes... And now, it is 
designer  nails.  Yes.  Nail  Art (the  in-thing  in  the  beauty 
business)  as the name implies involves executing designs on  the 
most assuming tips of your fingers. Chennaiites had a feel of the 
art during ace beautician Marium Zaveri's recent visit to  Lakme, 
on Nungambakkam High Road.

Marium, who runs Emeralde Hair and Beauty Care institue in Mumbai 
was  at Lakme to offer consultancy and specialised treatments  to 
the  beauty house's clientele. Demonstrating nail art to  curious 
onlookers,  Marium applied black base and coated it with  strands 
of  glitter. Shimmering stones made for those  telling  finishing 
touches. "All it requires is a dash of imagination and plenty  of 
patience".

Costing  Rs. 30 a nail, the art would match any bride's need  for 
ornamental  embellishments.  And  the bride's mate  can  try  the 
understated  designs! Ordinary nail polish remover would  suffice 
to wipe it away, says Marium, when asked about its longevity.

The  beautician,  who is in a mood to  field  questions,  stoutly 
refutes  suggestions that synthetic products were losing  out  to 
natural  ones  in the market. "The quality of brands  with  time-
tested  market  life remains unquestionable. Their  mildness  and 
acceptability have been proved over the years," she asserts.

Nevertheless has she got some handy hints to maintain that  much-
desired age-defying complexion without professional help? Looking 
good  involves a bit of an investment - of time, not  necessarily 
of money, going by Marium's cool home options that could give you 
the  best in face value. The natural beauty secrets include  milk 
pack,  vegetable  peel  pack, potato  slices  for  dark  circles, 
cucumber  pack for rejuvenation and most  importantly,  splashing 
cold water on the face. It is important to realise the effect  of 
milk  on skin. It pampers and soothens it and unlike  the  heavy, 
greasy  feel of some creams, you can feel the effect but not  its 
presence!

When pointed out that despite the maze of synthetic skin and hair 
care   products,   that   give   us   mind-boggling    scientific 
explanations,  aromatherapy  has a certain niche  no  matter  the 
prohibitive  price tag. Marium explains that it has  entered  the 
hall of fame in the beauty business because "pure essential  oils 
come without the threat of side effects." And further, it is  not 
"as  expensive as thought to be. With aromatherapy one  will  not  
only realise her derma dreams but also move forward with  renewed 
confidence. Such is its power on the mind."

Touching   upon  the  current  trend  towards   thermolysis   and 
tattooing,  she said that while the former helps remove  unwanted 
hair  permanently,  the  latter is being  used  as  a  corrective 
measure  to  give shape and colour to lips and  enhance  eyebrows 
besides  creating  beauty  spots.  Permanent  and  semi-permanent 
tattoos too can be done, she says.

As  for  specific  tips  to combat  the  Chennai  summer,  Marium 
explains that the sun's rays are the "skin's worst enemy. A light 
coloured  umbrella and sun screen are absolutely necessary.  Cool 
vegetable  packs and frequent face washes would go a long way  in 
preserving the skin in summer."

Lipsticks that do not leave marks on the cups, collars or cheeks, 
extencils  to  extend eyelashes, lotions to add volume  to  hair, 
foundations (mask?) to touch up pimples or freckles (remember  to 
carry  them down past the jaw line and over the throat  to  avoid 
those  tell-tale  tide  marks  if  you  use  them),  anti-wrinkle 
creams... and what not. If the barrage of synthetic wonders  on 
your  dressing table do not actually work, forget  them.  Because 
ultimately, inner peace and tranquillity is what is reflected  on 
your face.

T.KRITHIKA REDDY
