
A conspiracy: Scindia


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 29. Senior Congress(I)  leader,  Mr.  Madhavrao 
Scindia,  today said Mr. Ram Prakash Gupta's assertion on  Friday 
that his Government would allow the construction of a Ram  temple 
at  the  disputed site in Ayodhya, confirms fears that  the  BJP, 
backed  by the Sangh Parivar combine, is intent on  pursuing  its 
hidden agenda.

``The systematic manner in which the BJP is going ahead with  its 
agenda,  despite  denials at every step, only smacks of  a  deep-
seated  conspiracy  aimed at changing the secular  fibre  of  the 
country,'' Mr. Scindia said in a statement today.

The  recent  developments in Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat  raised  a 
question  whether the State Governments were acting on their  own 
or  their  actions  were in harmony with  their  party's  central 
leadership,  Mr.  Scindia  said. The  Prime  Minister,  Mr.  A.B. 
Vajpayee,  owes an explanation to the nation regarding the  stand 
taken  by  BJP-ruled  State  Governments  in  Uttar  Pradesh  and 
Gujarat, he added.

Mr.  Scindia  appealed  to those NDA partners  who  claim  to  be 
secular  to reconsider their position in view of these  ``glaring 
examples of stark political opportunism'' on the part of the BJP. 
It  was  clear that the BJP's real commitment was to  its  hidden 
agenda, he said.

Pranab's concern

Another  CWC member and the chairman of the  Congress(I)'s  media 
department,  Mr.  Pranab Mukherjee, also joined  issue  with  Mr. 
Gupta  saying he must be aware of the fact that  no  construction 
could commence at the disputed site at Ayodhya because the matter 
was  sub  judice. He demanded an unambiguous assurance  from  the 
Union   Government,  especially  the  Prime  Minister  and   Home 
Minister, that under no circumstances would the Sangh Parivar  be 
allowed  to construct the Ram temple until the matter is  settled 
by a judicial pronouncement.

He  lashed out at Mr. Gupta's contention that the  demolition  of 
the   Babri  Masjid  had  been  peaceful.  ``To  say   that   the 
construction  of  the  Ram  temple  will  be  allowed  if  it  is 
`peaceful' just as the demolition of Babri Masjid was  `peaceful' 
betrays  and  exposes the real and mala fide  intentions  of  the 
BJP,'' he said.

``It  is time Mr. Vajpayee took off the `mask' he is wearing  and 
reveals his real face, which is impatient to carry out the hidden 
agenda of the RSS-BJP combine.'' 

UNI reports:

The  CPI(M), on its part, demanded the resignation of  Mr.  Gupta 
for  his controversial statement and asked the allies  supporting 
the  Vajpayee  Government  to spell out their  stand.  ``A  Chief 
Minister   who   violates   elementary  norms   of   running   an 
administration cannot continue in office and the non-BJP  parties 
in the NDA should explain their stand on a blatantly communal and 
disruptive  statement  from a BJP chief  minister,''  the  CPI(M) 
politburo said.
