
Clinton calls for free world trade 


DAVOS,  JAN.  29.  The U.S. President, Mr.  Bill  Clinton,  today 
issued a strong appeal for free and open world trade and  markets 
and urged the delegates to take seriously those worried about the 
side-effects of globalisation.

Addressing the gathering at the ongoing 30th World Economic Forum 
summit  in  this Swiss ski resort, Mr. Clinton  referred  to  the 
violent  protests  at  the World Trade  Organisation  meeting  in 
Seattle  last  year  and advised the delegates  not  ``to  be  in 
denial'' about the protesters.

``Find  a way to let the dissenters have their say and turn  them 
into constructive partners,'' he told the audience which included 
dozens  of  Heads of State, Prime Ministers,  Finance  Ministers, 
central bank governors and corporate chief executives.

``Those who heard the wake-up call in the streets of Seattle  got 
the  right message,'' Mr. Clinton said while urging the  business 
leaders to consider the anti-WTO protesters' concerns seriously.

While  backing China's admission to the WTO he also endorsed  the 
trade  body as an institution for ensuring rule-based  trade  and 
business relations.

Questioned about his vision for the future by the WEF  president, 
Mr. Klaus Schwab, Mr. Clinton said, ``don't leave the little guys 
out... develop a shared vision''.

The  British Premier, Mr. Tony Blair, suggested a common  resolve 
among industrialised countries to slash tariffs for imports  from 
developing countries. 

He  said the WTO needed to open itself to the public in order  to 
begin  a  new round of trade talks and added ``we  cannot  afford 
another Seattle''.

India's view

During  the  course  of the  meeting,  India's  approach  towards 
globalisation will be outlined by the Union Finance Minister, Mr. 
Yashwant Sinha, during his address which will seek to stress that 
globalisation  should be free of exploitation and should  not  be 
merely  confined to the flow of capital, trade and technology  as 
was evident now. 

- PTI, DPA
