
BJP reaches deal on Orissa, Haryana


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 29. The BJP which has been engaged in a  tug  of 
war  with its allies in the last few weeks over seat-sharing  for 
the Assembly elections has finally something to cheer about.

After  a  great  deal  of haggling the  party  has  succeeded  in 
managing an agreement with the Biju Janata Dal in Orissa and  the 
Indian National Lok Dal in Haryana. Thanks to tough bargaining by 
the  regional allies, the BJP had to settle for fewer seats  than 
it had hoped to contest.

As per the agreement late on Friday night between the Biju Janata 
Dal  and the BJP, the BJD would contest 84 seats and the BJP  the 
remaining  63. The formula is a repeat of the  agreement  between 
the  two  parties  at  the time of the  Lok  Sabha  elections  in 
October. While the BJD contested 12 Lok Sabha seats, the BJP  had 
contested seven seats.

In  Orissa the BJP had pitched its demand for 50 per cent of  the 
share  and brought it down to 70 seats but the BJD took  a  tough 
stand  and insisted on being the dominant partner. State  leaders 
of  the  BJP in Orissa are not happy with the agreement  but  the 
central leaders are confident that everything will be sorted  out 
in the next few days.

The INLD president and the Haryana Chief Minister, Mr. Om Prakash 
Chauthala  and  the  Union Parliamentary  Affairs  Minister,  Mr. 
Pramod Mahajan, were engaged in hectic parleys till the wee hours 
of  Friday and they appear to have clinched the deal  though  the 
state  unit  leaders  of BJP are fuming over what  they  term  as 
`sell-out' by the high command.

The BJP was insisting on contesting 35 of the 90 seats in Haryana 
but the INLD is not willing to concede more than 28 seats.  There 
is a possibility of the INLD conceding a couple of more seats and 
the central leadership of the BJP appears inclined to accept  the 
offer.  The scene with regard to Bihar where the  nomination  for 
the  second  phase of election in the state is to end  on  Monday 
continues  to be hazy though the BJP leaders claimed  here  today 
that  the differences among the allies of the NDA  have  narrowed 
down `substantially'.

The BJP general secretary, Mr. M. Venkaiah Naidu, told  reporters 
here today that there was a meeting among the leaders of the  NDA 
at  the  residence of the Union Finance  Minister,  Mr.  Yashwant 
Sinha,  on  Friday  night and the talks were  continuing  at  the 
residence  of the Defence Minister, Mr. George Fernandes, as  the 
Finance Minister had to leave for Davos to attend the meeting  of 
the World Economic Forum.

A senior leader of the BJP claimed here that of the 324 seats  in 
Bihar,  there was complete agreement among the NDA allies on  205 
seats. Of the remaining seats 22 are considered to be strongholds 
of the opposition combine and none of the constituents of the NDA 
are keen on staking their claim for these. 

That  leaves  97  seats  for  which  talks  were  on  to  resolve 
differences.  In  56  of these, there are  rival  claims  by  two 
parties  and  after marathon negotiations differences  have  been 
narrowed  down on 51 seats. In 41 seats most of the NDA  partners 
are staking their claim as they are considered `sure seats.
