
BJP defends move to review Constitution


By Our Special Correspondent

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 29. Insufficient decentralisation down  to  the 
grassroots is one of the reasons extended by the Bharatiya Janata 
Party  for  a  review of the Constitution. The aim  would  be  to 
increase  stability at the Centre and the States, and to  devolve 
more  powers  to  the  States,  the  municipal  bodies  and   the 
panchayati raj institutions.

Mr.  M. Venkaiah Naidu, BJP general secretary  and  spokesperson, 
today defended the Government's announcement of its intention  to 
set  up a commission to review the Constitution. ``The fruits  of 
development have not reached a majority of our countrymen''  even 
after 53 years of Independence, Mr. Naidu said, But party leaders 
were  not  able  to  point  to  any  specific  provision  in  the 
Constitution that has prevented this from happening.

Party  leaders  are one in saying that the review  was  meant  to 
``strengthen  the  Constitution''  and  make  it  an  ``effective 
instrument for faster and equitable socio-economic development.'' 
But  when  asked  specifically  to  identify  any  Constitutional 
provision  which had in fact impeded development, all  they  said 
was that instability with frequent elections had come in the  way 
of a faster rate of growth.

A  senior party leader, who was at one time involved in  studying 
the  Constitution and preparing a review report, pointed  to  the 
directive  principles,  which  have  remained  enshrined  in  the 
Constitution  but  have not been implemented.  The  intention  to 
bring  in  a  uniform  civil  code,  a  part  of  the   directive 
principles,  was  mentioned by him as an example even as  it  was 
quickly added that the review proposed by the Government was  not 
intended  to touch the ``contentious issues'' raised  earlier  by 
the  BJP  but  which were not part of  the  National  Agenda  for 
Governance adopted by the Vajpayee-led Government. Mr. Naidu also 
used the occasion to point out that the need for a uniform  civil 
code  was not ``our hidden agenda'' but a part of  the  directive 
principles of the Constitution.

Mr.  Naidu said that if ``we'' have failed the  Constitution,  it 
could only mean that the Congress(I), which ruled the country for 
the longest time, has failed and has been unable to translate the 
``noble  ideals''  in  the preamble to the  Constitution  into  a 
reality for the common man.

The  BJP  turned  down the idea of  specific  amendments  to  the 
Constitution  to deal with any problem saying there could  be  no 
amendment without a review.

It  was pointed out that the Prime Minister had  already  assured 
Parliament that the Government did not intend tinkering with  the  
basic structure.

The  party felt there should not be all this noisy opposition  to 
the  idea,  for  the  Government was only  seeking  a  study  and 
suggestions  for change through a review, which in turn could  be 
widely  debated inside and outside Parliament. If any change  was 
made, it would only be after an informed debate and by voting  in 
Parliament. ``We cannot mesmerise Parliament into voting what the 
parties do not want,'' he said.
