
A tribute to Kargil heroes 


By Aarti Dhar

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 29. The massed band played ``Abide With  Me...'' 
and the bells tolled in the background of the majestic expanse of 
Rashtrapati   Bhavan  as  the  National  Tricolour  was   lowered 
respectfully this evening in the presence of the President -  who 
is  also the Supreme Commander of the nation's Defence  Forces  - 
bringing to a close the Republic Day celebrations.

The ceremonial ``Beating Retreat'' which unfolded at Vijay  Chowk 
was  a  tribute  to  the heroes of  Kargil  with  two  new  tunes 
dedicated to the brave soldiers. 

Both  the tunes, ``Vir Kargil'' and ``Mushko Valley'', played  by 
the military band, were composed by Major (retd) Nazir Hussain.

The setting sun behind Raisina Hill provided the right atmosphere 
for the pipers and drummers to display precision and  perfection, 
their motto. 

The  show began at 5 p.m. with the arrival of the President,  Mr. 
K. R. Narayanan, escorted by men from the President's  Bodyguard. 
He  was received by the Vice- President, the Prime Minister,  the 
Defence Minister and the three Service Chiefs. 

Also  present to witness the spectacular show was the  Leader  of 
the Opposition, Mrs. Sonia Gandhi, and several Cabinet  Ministers 
among others, though the VIP enclosures appeared somewhat empty.

The  security arrangements were unprecedented and  many  invitees 
had  to  go back because their names were not  mentioned  on  the 
cards.  Women had a particularly tough time during  frisking  and 
were  not  allowed  to  take  in  small  purses,  pens  and  even 
lipsticks. Children carrying toffees or chiclets were made to eat 
them or throw them away.

The  buglers  presented a fanfare which was followed by  a  quick 
march by the massed band. The pipers and drummers mesmerised  the 
audience  with their amazing coordination of tunes  and  staccato 
movement of feet on both quick and slow marches. 

A centuries-old military tradition, Beating Retreat dates back to 
the days when troops disengaged from battle at sunset. As soon as 
the bugles sounded retreat, the troops ceased fighting,  sheathed 
their  arms,  and withdrew from the battlefield. The  custom  has 
been retained to this day.

Once the massed band moved out, the Navy and Air Force bands took 
over.  They played `Marching 2000' on quick march to  herald  the 
beginning of a new millennium, a tune composed by Commander S. A. 
Anchees.  The military band paid a rich tribute to  its  soldiers  
for their valour in Kargil by playing two new tunes, ``Vir Kargil 
and  Mushko  Valley'. Two more tunes included in this  band  were 
``Golden Trumpet'' and ``Himgiri''.

Drumbeats are a relic of the days when troops housed in towns and 
cities  were recalled to their quarters at an appointed  time  in 
the evening. 

``Drums  Call'' is a prelude to the retreat which creates a  mood 
of  nostalgia. The chiming bells which pierced through  the  awe-
struck  audience marked the beginning of the end. Composed by  W. 
H. Monk, ``Abide with me...'' the favourite tune of the Father of 
the  Nation,  began sharp at sunset and the flag was  downed  and 
folded by the time the notes ended.

The  ceremony  was formally declared closed with the  playing  of 
``Sare  Jahan Se Achcha...'' by the 750 men participating in  the 
show. And as the last soldier melted away into the backdrop,  the 
grand Rashtrapati Bhavan and its adjoining building were lit  up, 
evoking an instant applause from the audience.

Members   of  the  President's  Bodyguard   deployed   themselves 
instantaneously and the National Anthem was played.
