
Mystery trail ends in holy town 


By Sutirtho Patranobis

NEW  DELHI,  JAN. 29. What initially appeared to  be  a  possible 
security  breach has turned out to be one  man's  disillusionment 
with  the  world  around him. Mr. V. Rajendran,  a  senior  Under 
Secretary  with  the  Union Defence  Ministry  who  had  abruptly 
disappeared  this past week while on the way to his office  here, 
has now been traced to the holy town of Hardwar in Uttar  Pradesh 
where he apparently went in ``.... search of the Almighty''.

His  harried family on Saturday received a letter posted  by  him 
from   Hardwar,  putting  at  rest  all  speculation  about   his 
whereabouts. The letter, dated January 26, reached the  Rajendran 
family's Ramakrishnapuram residence here this afternoon.  Written 
in  English,  the longish letter was addressed to his  wife,  Ms. 
Sushila.  Following  the arrival of the letter,  Mr.  Rajendran's 
family  - comprising his wife and two daughters, Akhila (18)  and 
Suhasini  (16) - informed the R. K. Puram police station. A  case 
of abduction had been registered there on January 25, a day after 
the mysterious vanishing act. 

Soon after, a police team under the supervision of the Additional 
Station  House  Officer of the R. K. Puram  police  station,  Mr. 
Bahadur Singh, was despatched to Hardwar to try and convince  Mr. 
Rajendran to come back. A few close family members, including Mr. 
Rajendran's  brother  who arrived here from Chennai a  couple  of 
days ago, have gone with the police team. 

``Because  of  the  kind of mental state he would be  in,  it  is 
necessary  that  people  close to him are  around,''  the  Deputy 
Commissioner of Police (South-West Delhi), Mr. K. Kamraj, said on 
Saturday night.

The  letter  talked of Mr. Rajendran's disillusionment  with  the 
world  around him and his overall dissatisfaction with life,  Mr. 
Kamraj  said,  adding that he had not  mentioned  any  particular 
reason for his sudden departure to Hardwar.

``There  were many mentions about the Almighty in the letter  and 
that  he had received `sudden inspiration from God'.  The  letter 
was very religious and philosophical in content and talked  about 
Mr.  Rajendran's feeling of closeness to God,'' Mr. Kamraj  said. 
The letter also said, ``I am at Hardwar.''

Mr. Rajendran vanished while on his way to office on January  24. 
He had left home at about 9 in the morning and visited the  local 
dispensary - he was apparently suffering from an upset stomach  - 
but never reached office. Mr. Rajendran had not taken his car out 
that day.

In all probability, Mr. Rajendran left for Hardwar that very day.  
``He  would  have  reached the holy town within  six  hours.  The 
letter  was  posted  two days later,''  the  Deputy  Commissioner 
said.

The  letter had a word of advice for his two  teenage  daughters. 
Mr.  Rajendran asked them not to worry about him and  concentrate 
on  their  studies.  He asked them to get  good  marks  in  their 
forthcoming  examinations  and  not get  disturbed.  His  younger 
daughter Suhasini's pre-Board examinations are under way now.

That Mr. Rajendran had not been abducted was quite apparent  from 
the  beginning,  Mr. Kamraj said. A case of  abduction  had  been 
registered  as  a matter of utmost caution as he was not  only  a 
Defence  Ministry official but also part of the  Ministry's  team 
for the Republic Day Parade down Rajpath. Mr. Rajendran had  been 
assigned the job of recognising and ushering in Defence  Ministry 
officials for the Parade.

While   his  family  members  were  not  very  forthcoming   with 
information, Mr. Rajendran's colleagues only had words of  praise 
for him. ``They all said he was very attached to his job and  was 
a workaholic. He was very methodical as well,'' Mr. Kamraj  said. 
Further, it had been learnt that the 46-year-old man was inclined 
to praying a lot. He would often get up early in the morning  and 
go out for solitary walks.

In  fact,  the  police  had gone on record  as  saying  that  the 
disappearance  was  not  mysterious and could be  linked  to  his 
personal  life. Not a single ransom letter or telephone call  was 
received,  indicating  that there was no foul  play.  His  ``duty 
pass'' for the Parade was also retrieved from his house and ruled 
out any foul play.
