
Badal tries to play peacemaker in 'hukumnama' crisis


By Sarabjit Pandher 

CHANDIGARH, JAN. 29. Even as a massive damage control exercise is 
underway  to deal with the fallout of the crisis emerging out  of 
the  `hukumnama' issued by the Jathedar of the Akal Takht,  Giani 
Puran  Singh,  the  Punjab Chief Minister and  president  of  the 
Shiromani  Akali  Dal (SAD), Mr. Parkash Singh Badal,  has  taken 
some  personal initiatives. However, complete confusion has  been 
reported  among the rank and file of the ruling party as  workers 
and  leaders are beginning to feel frustrated after dealing  with 
one crisis after the other.

According to insiders, Mr. Badal utilised all of Saturday to open 
more avenues to placate Giani Puran Singh, whose return to Punjab 
is  being eagerly awaited. Reports said that Mr. Badal  met  some 
leaders  of  a faction of the Sikh Students'  Federation,  a  top 
media  baron and some saints to explore the  possibilities.  This 
section  has  been quite active and worked in  tandem  since  the 
Jathedar  issued the edict to excommunicate the president of  the 
Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC), Bibi Jagir Kaur.

To contain the growing feeling of dismay that has been  expressed 
by  senior ruling party leaders, albeit candidly and in  private, 
Mr.  Badal has for the first time initiated visible efforts  that 
he  had decided to step in to work out an amicable  solution.  He 
indicated the same to presspersons who met him in Jalandhar  this 
afternoon and exhibited optimism about reaching a solution  which 
would be acceptable to all.

Meanwhile,  various  sections  of  Punjab's  religio-   political 
circles  are  awaiting the arrival of Giani Puran Singh,  who  is 
returning  after  attending  the installation  ceremony  of  Bhai 
Kulwant  Singh as the Jathedar of Takht Hazur Sahib at Nanded  in 
Maharashtra.

It  is expected that Bhai Kulwant Singh and a  representative  of 
the  Jathedar  of Takht Patna Sahib, who are  accompanying  Giani 
Puran  Singh  to Amritsar, would participate in  the  February  2 
meeting  at the Akal Takht. If this happens, it would be  a  rare 
event  as  the  Jathedars  of all five  Takhts  would  meet.  The 
Jathedars of the Patna and Nanded Takhts have already taken sides 
with  Giani  Puran  Singh in staying the  implementation  of  the 
controversial Nanakshahi calendar.

In   Amritsar,   complete  confusion  was  reported   from   SGPC 
headquarters, especially on taking a decision whether all members 
of the executive committee should appear before the Akal Takht on 
February 2 or not. In his edict, Giani Puran had summoned all the 
15 members of SGPC's executive body.

While  Bibi Jagir Kaur has maintained that she had  not  received  
any  copy  of  the  summons and has  been  resisting  efforts  to 
persuade  her  to  submit, the senior  SGPC  vice-president,  Mr. 
Balbir   Singh  Pannu,  while  accepting  the  validity  of   the 
``hukumnama'', said that no decision on appearing before the Akal 
Takht had been taken. On the other hand, a known Badal  loyalist, 
Mr. Hardalbir Singh Shah, has already been quoted as saying  that 
he would appear before the Jathedar.

The  confusion  has  been compounded by the fact  that  the  SGPC 
management  has  not been able to contact the Jathedar  since  he 
issued the directive on Monday. The SGPC secretary, Dr. Gurbachan 
Singh  Bachan, has said that he would meet Giani Puran  Singh  as 
soon as he reached Amritsar.

However, the surprise move came from the Akali parties led by the 
former SGPC chief, Mr. G.S. Tohra, and the Lok Sabha member,  Mr. 
Simranjit  Singh  Mann,  who  have  three  members  in  the  SGPC 
executive.  On  behalf  of these  Akali  factions,  an  executive 
committee  member, Mr. Harbans Singh Manjhpur, told  presspersons 
in Amritsar this evening that he, along with the other two, would 
appear before the Jathedar.

The  development  is  crucial  as both  these  factions  had  not 
recognised  Giani Puran Singh when he replaced Bhai Ranjit  Singh 
as Jathedar. The three had also supported Bibi Jagir Kaur in  the 
issue of the calendar. 

Mr.  Manjhpur  sought the resignation of Bibi Jagir Kaur  as  the 
SGPC head and demanded that she apologise and express regrets for 
defying the authority of the Akal Takht.

These  Akali factions have also appealed to Giani Puran Singh  to 
summon Mr. Badal for violating a previous ``hukumnama'' issued by 
Akal  Takht  on  December 12, 1998, by the  then  Jathedar,  Bhai 
Ranjit Singh, directing a cease-fire between Akali factions  till 
the  completion of the tercentenary celebrations of the  creation 
of Khalsa.
