
Elitist approach led to TRAI's downfall 


By Sandeep Dikshit

NEW  DELHI, JAN. 29. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of  India's 
(TRAI) inability to address issues relating to the common man was 
the  main reason for replacement of all but one of  its  existing 
members and a dilution of its role.

Even  politicians  and parties like the Telugu Desam  Party,  who 
were   sympathetic   to   the   previous   Justice   Sodhi-headed 
dispensation  in  the TRAI, turned lukewarm to  pleas  for  their 
continuance   once   it  was  succinctly  explained   how   their 
recommendations would harm the National Telecom Policy's  primary 
objective of increasing tele-density and making phones affordable 
to the common man.

According   to  official  sources,  the  Parliamentary   Standing 
Committee  on Communications was recently explained  the  harmful 
implications of some of the TRAI's recommendations,  particularly 
those  relating  to phone rates and  the  controversial  `calling 
party pays' scheme for mobile phones, struck down recently by the 
courts  on  grounds of jurisdiction. The  Standing  Committee  is 
currently  examining the functioning of the TRAI and  had  sought 
views in this regard.

First,  the new phone rates were announced by the TRAI  in  March 
1999 after disregarding the ground realities such as the need  to 
channel extra revenue from long-distance call charges to fund the 
expansion  of  telecom  in rural areas. The TRAI  was  told  that 
introduction of cost-based tariffs at the current juncture should 
be avoided till a fairly good tele-density was reached.

But  it ignored this advice went ahead and notified  phone  rates 
which led to even Treasury Benches rising in protest. To  placate 
parliamentarians,  the Government then issued a policy  directive 
for  holding  the rates in abeyance but this was ignored  by  the 
TRAI.  In order to make phones affordable to the common man,  the 
Government  had  to keep the rates low  for  economically  weaker 
sections  of  the population. But the comfort of  cross-  funding 
these  subscribers  from  the extra  revenue  earned  from  long-
distance  call charges was lost as the Government chose to  abide 
with  the TRAI-notified rates. As a result, a revenue loss of  up 
to Rs. 2,500 crores during the 1999-2000 fiscal is anticipated.

Since the TRAI had planned to revise the tariff over the next two 
years  as well, the losses will mount, and according  to  telecom 
officials,   this  paucity  of  resources  will  affect   telecom 
development.  Pointing  out that tariffs are the  most  important 
tool for determining the level of funds available for investment, 
officials  say had the TRAI been allowed to revise tariffs  twice 
over the next two years, the target of achieving tele-density  of 
seven  per 1,000 people by the year 2005 would  be  unachievable.  
The   Telecom   Department  will  also  be  unable   to   provide 
``reliable'' transmission media in rural areas.

While  attempting to emasculate the main objective  of  spreading 
the  use  of phones by the Government sector, the TRAI  turned  a 
blind  eye  to the failure by private fixed  phone  companies  to 
abide  by their commitment of providing 10 per cent of phones  in 
rural areas. 

Officials  said till date, the TRAI has not taken nay  action  to 
ensure compliance of this condition by private companies.

The   TRAI's  norms  for  revenue-sharing  between  fixed   phone 
companies  and cellular companies under which 80 per cent of  the 
income  from calls made from DoT/MTNL phones to  cellular  phones 
was also against the interest of the consumers. 

The TRAI is also yet to take action on issues affecting  consumer 
interest. For instance, it was asked to recommend ways and  means 
to fund socially important obligations around the same time as it 
was requested to recommend the opening of long distance services.
