
Bajrang Dal to raise anti-terrorist teams


By Our Special Correspondent

HYDERABAD,  JAN.  29.  Christian  missionaries  who  carried  out 
conversions  and  the abettors of Islamic fundamentalism  in  the 
country  would  face  a more militant action  from  the  Hindutva 
forces, the Bajrang Dal leader, Mr. Harish Bhai Bhatt, warned  on 
Saturday. 

At a press conference here, the Dal's national general  secretary 
said  the organisation had plans to train Hindu youth in  ``every 
way''  to  counter  the threat of the  missionaries  and  Islamic 
fundamentalists. They would face a more offensive action from the 
Dal activists henceforth.

The construction of a Ram mandir at the disputed site in  Ayodhya 
within  the next two years and raising teams of  highly-  trained 
Hindu  youth to counter ISI-sponsored terrorism and its  abettors 
were the priorities of the Dal, he said. 

Mr. Bhatt said that neither the Dal nor the Vishwa Hindu Parishad 
(VHP)  needed the ``sanction, approval, permission or  help''  of 
the Centre and State Governments in constructing the Ram  temple. 
The  temple was on the agenda of the VHP and the Dal and  not  on 
that of the BJP; hence, they were not in the need of the latter's 
support.  The construction would take place at ``lightning  speed 
just as the masjid demolition took place''. 

Accusing  the BJP of softening its policy towards minorities,  he 
said  the party would learn a bitter lesson soon. The BJP had  to 
come  back  to  the Hindu fold if it wanted to  survive.  On  the 
temple front, work on 54 pillars was in the final stages and once 
it was completed, the pillars would be brought to Ayodhya and the 
temple would be constructed. 

The convention of the Dal in Bhopal next month would pave the way 
for  militant  Hindutva action against all past mistakes  of  the 
Islamic rulers and ``every temple, place of worship or any site'' 
converted  into  Muslim  worship places would  be  liberated  and 
original temples restored. 

Dismissing  Masood  Azar as an insignificant person, he  said  at 
best  Azar was craving for publicity. Criticising the Centre  for 
releasing militants in exchange for hostages inside the  hijacked 
flight,  Mr.  Bhatt  said Hindu youth would be  taught  to  fight 
terrorism. 

Criticising  the Government for ``begging the United  States  and 
others  to  declare  Pakistan as a  terrorist  state'',  he  said 
``instead  we  must  ourselves declare it so  and  take  punitive 
action  against  it.  We do not require  others  help  to  punish 
Pakistan.''  

He demanded that a survey be conducted of all newly-  constructed 
and  renovated mosques and ``madrasa'' to check  any  anti-Indian 
activity.  He  said  that illegal  foreign  nationals  should  be 
deported  and  that  a law be  enacted  making  prior  permission 
mandatory for construction of religious places. 
