
Cong.(I) confident of returning to power in Orissa 


By Our Staff Correspondent

BHUBANESWAR,  JAN.  29. As the Assembly elections draw  close  in 
Orissa, the Pradesh Congress(I) chief, Mr. J. B. Patnaik, claimed 
today  that  the  party  would  return  to  power  defeating  the 
Bharatiya Janata Party-Biju Janata Dal alliance.

Terming  the BJP-BJD combine a ``paper tiger'', Mr. Patnaik  said 
the  Congress(I) alone could provide a stable  government,  which 
was  required  to rebuild the State which suffered  two  cyclones 
last year. ``The Congress(I) has the strength and will to rebuild 
Orissa,'' he said at a press conference here.

The former Chief Minister said that the party was planning to  go 
in  for seat adjustments with parties which were opposed  to  the 
BJP-BJD  alliance.  In  all likelihood, of  the  147  seats,  the 
Congress(I) would contest 145, leaving the remaining two for  the 
Janata  Dal(U)  and  the Janta Dal(S). The two  seats  which  are 
likely  to go to the JD(U) and the JD(S) are Loisingha and  Korei 
respectively.

The Congress(I) has already announced its candidates for as  many 
as  139  seats.  The nominees for the remaining  seats  would  be 
cleared  soon, Mr. Patnaik said. Asked whether he  would  contest 
from any of these segments, he said, ``I may.''

The  PCC(I) chief said that in the 139 seats the  candidates  for 
which had been announced on Friday evening, there were 13  women. 
Due  representation  had  been given to those  belonging  to  the 
minorities - four Muslims, three Christians and one Sikh had been 
nominated.  Besides, there were 56 new faces in the list  and  as 
many as 42 of the 139 were below 45 years of age.

As many as 12 sitting MLAs and Ministers had been refused  ticket 
for  the  ensuing polls, prominent among them being  the  Finance 
Minister,  Mr.  Bhagabat Prasad Mohanty, and the  Panchayati  Raj 
Minister, Mr. Raghunath Patnaik. 

``The final decision was taken by the Central Election  Committee 
in  New  Delhi,''  Mr. Patnaik said, when asked  to  specify  the 
reasons for denial of the tickets to Mr. Mohanty and Mr. Patnaik.

The  sitting MLAs who had declined to contest were  Mr.  Giridhar 
Gamang and Ms. Nandini Satpathy, both former Chief Ministers, Mr. 
Prasanna  Mishra,  former Assembly Speaker, and  Mr.  Bibhudendra 
Pratap Das.

Even  though  there  is resentment among  the  sitting  MLAs  and 
Ministers who have been denied the tickets, the Congress(I) looks 
hopeful  of  benefiting  of  the  problems  within  the   BJP-BJD 
alliance. 
