
China releases scholar 


BEIJING, JAN. 29. A U.S.-based scholar detained in China for more 
than  five  months on vague charges of  ``providing  confidential 
materials to foreigners'' was released on Saturday.

The  scholar, Mr. Song Yongyi, a research librarian at  Dickinson 
College  in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, was detained in August  while 
collecting  documents concerning the 1966-76 Cultural  Revolution 
that  are  widely available in markets and curio  shops.  He  was 
formally  charged  last  month with ``the  purchase  and  illegal 
provision  of intelligence to foreigners,'' a move  that  alarmed 
academics  overseas, who saw a threat to research  activities  in 
China, as well as American politicians. Together, the two  groups 
waged  a  vigorous campaign to gain the release of  Mr.  Song,  a 
Chinese  citizen  who had been scheduled to  become  an  American 
citizen weeks after he had been detained.

``I  was  so excited, but it was so strange  I  couldn't  believe 
it,''  said his wife, Ms. Helen Yao. She said she had been  given 
no  reason  for the release of Mr. Song. A  statement  issued  on 
Friday  by  the Chinese Embassy in Washington said Mr.  Song  had 
been  shown  ``leniency''  and  not  prosecuted  because  he  had 
admitted   his  ``criminal  activities''  and   had   volunteered 
information  about the ``illegal activities of others.'' Ms.  Yao 
said  in a phone conversation Mr. Song had insisted that  he  had 
``never  confessed to a crime - no, never.'' Mr.  Song's  lawyers 
have  said  all along that he was in China  collecting  materials 
about  the  Cultural Revolution as part of his job.  They  denied 
that  involved anything criminal. The ``leniency'' release  is  a 
bittersweet victory for many of Mr. Song's dogged supporters, who 
saw his predicament as a test case not only for academic freedom, 
but also for legal reform in China.

``Given  the state of the process of Chinese  judicial  reform,'' 
Mr.  Arlen Specter, Republican Senator from  Pennsylvania,  said, 
``I  think  it would be too much to expect that they'd  admit  to 
having   made   a  mistake.''  Mr.  Specter   had   sponsored   a 
Congressional resolution to demand that Mr. Song be freed, and he 
received  the first official news of the release at  a  scheduled 
meeting with the Chinese Ambassador to Washington.

The   Chinese  Government  has  frequently   released   political 
dissidents  on medical grounds to rid itself of  prisoners  whose 
cases had become public relations problems.

Mr.  Song became the object of a huge petition drive by  scholars 
on  four continents. They said their ability to conduct  research 
in  China would be severely compromised if Mr. Song's case  stood 
as a precedent. 

- New York Times
