
Russia minting rupees for India 


By Vladimir Radyuhin

MOSCOW,  JAN. 30. A Russian mint has been working full  steam  to 
fulfill India's order for making 400 million five-rupee coins and 
hopes to win more contracts from the Indian treasury.

The  first  quantity of 60.9 million coins was shipped  in  early 
December  and  the second, of 58.8 million coins,  followed  this 
month.  A total of 3,600 metric tonnes of coins will go to  India 
under the deal.

The  Moscow Mint beat 27 competitors from Britain,  South  Korea, 
South  Africa, Germany, Canada, and elsewhere, to win  its  first 
overseas contract.

``Organisers  of  the  tender set very tough terms  -  almost  no 
prepayment,  low  production  costs,  high  quality,  and   short 
production time,'' said the mint's manager, Mr. Yuri Yermakov.

The face value of the coins will be close to $ 46.5 million,  and 
the Indian Government will pay the mint the equivalent of  around 
$  16  millions, in Deutsche marks, the currency chosen  for  the 
transaction. That means about $ 30 millions in seigniorage -  the 
difference between the price of producing the money and its  face 
value - for New Delhi. The mint's own profit from the deal is not 
being revealed.

According  to  Mr. Yermakov, the Indian side was happy  with  the 
quality of the coins minted so far and placed another order  with 
his mint to make dies for two-rupee coins.

To fill the India order, the mint got a trade loan from  Russia's 
Norilsk  Nickel,  the  world largest  producer  of  non-  ferrous 
metals.  The loan came in the form of copper and nickel  and  was 
worth  over $ 12 millions. The rupee is made of a 3-to-1  copper-
nickel alloy.

With  the  Russian  market  for coins  saturated,  the  mint  has 
recently  fallen on hard times, laying off 250 workers,  about  a 
third  of its staff, and scaling down production  by  two-thirds. 
The  India  deal  generated  funds to  bring  back  the  laid-off 
personnel, the mint's manager said.

The mint is hoping to expand its business from the India deal  to 
mint  coins  for other countries. The Panamanian  government  has 
approached Russia about minting 350 million of its coins.  Panama 
uses the US dollar but also has its own currency, the balboa.
