
Conservatives step up onslaught 


By Kesava Menon

MANAMA  (BAHRAIN) JAN. 29. Iranian conservatives have pulled  out 
all  stops in their bid to win the parliamentary election  to  be 
held  on Feb. 18. They have disqualified the  leading  contenders 
from  the  pro- reform camps, won over a  centrist  formation  to 
their  side and launched a no-holds-barred  propaganda  campaign. 
There  are a few more tricks they can pull before the voting  and 
the question now is whether the reform groups can cope with  this 
onslaught. 

A  month  or  two ago, the answer would have  been  ``yes''.  The 
reform groups had the public momentum completely in their  favour 
as  the  conservatives  seemed to be  taking  one  misstep  after 
another.  But  now,  the  election process  has  moved  into  the 
detailed  phase.  Voters have the panel  of  opposing  candidates 
right in front of them and here the fact that the reformers  have 
been  forced to pick relatively lesser known candidates can be  a 
disadvantage. Pro-reform groups have sought to partially overcome 
this problem by putting a Khatami and a Nour on the top of  their 
slate. One of them, Mr. Mohammed Reza Khatami, is the brother  of 
the reformist President, Mr. Hojatolesslam Syed Mohammed Khatami, 
and  the  other  Mr. Ali Reza Nouri, the brother  of  the  jailed 
dissident cleric, Mr. Abdollah Nouri. 

It  is  not as yet clear who the reform groups  will  project  as 
their  choice of Speaker and the head of the legislature. If  the 
reformers  achieve a big victory, this might be a  minor  problem 
since they could ask one of their winning candidates to step down 
in  favour  of  Mr. Abdollah Nouri who was  the  automatic  first 
choice till he was sentenced to imprisonment by a clerical court. 
Mr. Nouri had asked the chief public prosecutor to permit him  to 
appeal  to the regular judiciary against the conviction  but  the 
prosecutor  refused  to oblige. Even if the  reformers  win  they 
might  not be able to immediately revoke Mr.  Nouris'  conviction 
but  a big reform victory could unleash a sea-change  in  Iranian 
politics  and  some of the edicts of  the  conservative-dominated 
establishment will not survive. 

The pro-reform groups will project their loyalty to the President 
and  his policies as their main feature. But it is probable  that 
Mr. Khatami will not be able to campaign very effectively for his 
loyalists  since the conservatives are bound to  protest  against 
what they would describe as partisanship by the President. It is, 
of  course,  clear  what sort of result  will  help  the  popular 
President  carry  forward  his reforms  and,  therefore,  a  very 
vigorous campaign by Mr. Khatami might not be necessary.  Besides 
the  lack of an identifiable leader, the reform groups also  face 
another problem. 

Well  before the election process got underway, it was clear  the  
conservative-dominated   Council   of   Guardians,   which   vets 
candidates  and  monitors  the poll,  would  disqualify  as  many 
prominent reformers as they possibly could. To meet this  threat, 
the pro-reform groups had filed multiple candidacies. Though  the 
Council  did  as expected, there are still a  lot  of  pro-reform 
candidates  remaining  in the fray and they are not  all  on  one 
list. Unless the pro-reform groups can reconcile their panels and 
get  some to withdraw they might confuse the voters  and  scatter 
the pro-reform vote. 

Confusion  within  the  pro-reform camp could be  lethal  in  the 
circumstances  in  which  the  elections  are  being  held.   The 
conservatives have managed to get the former President, Ayatollah 
Ali   Akbar  Hashemi  Rafsanjani,  and  his  executive   of   the 
Reconstruction  Party over to their side. Mr. Rafsanjani and  his 
executives  had, in the Presidential election of 1997,  projected 
themselves as a moderate group of pragmatists but now the  former 
President is the conservative group's choice for the Speakership. 

Their campaign would be further strengthened by the release  from 
prison of the former Teheran mayor, Mr. Gholamhussein  Karbaschi, 
who  can influence powerful groups even though he is not  allowed 
to contest the polls. 

Mr. Rafsanjani has launched a very vigorous, even a vituperative, 
campaign  against  the  reform  groups.  The  main   conservative 
argument  against  the  reformers is  that  they  have  neglected 
economic  development  while focusing  excessively  on  cultural, 
social and political freedoms. 

The  charge has been embellished with the usual litany  that  the 
reformers  are  in cahoots with the CIA etc.  Conservatives  also 
point  out  that  the leftist clergy,  now  with  the  reformers, 
includes persons who were responsible for some of the worst human 
rights abuses in the early days of the revolution. 

A  month or so ago, it had appeared that even a lamp- post  could 
win if it stood on a ticket endorsed by Mr. Khatami. There  seems 
little  reason  to doubt that the public mood is still  with  Mr. 
Khatami  and that not even Mr. Rafsanjani will be able  to  shake 
the  President's  support  among  the  masses.  But  whether  the 
reformers are up to the task organisationally-speaking is the big 
question.
