
Resolution moved to brand Pak. a terrorist state


WASHINGTON,  JAN. 29. A resolution branding Pakistan a  terrorist 
state has been referred to the United States' House International 
Relations   Committee,   amid  suggestions   from   the   Clinton 
administration  that  Islamabad  could face  such  action  if  it 
continues to support militant groups.

``Besides the terrorist organisations themselves, those countries 
that  harbour  terrorist  organisations  or  provide  them   with 
technical,  financial, political or other support should be  held 
accountable,''  the  Democratic Congressman, Mr.  Frank  Pallone, 
said  introducing  the  resolution in the house  on  Friday.  The 
resolution  was co-sponsored by the Republican  Congressman,  Mr. 
Bill McCollum. 

Mr.  Pallone, a former Co-Chairman of the India caucus, has  also 
written  to  the  Secretary of  State,  Ms.  Madeleine  Albright, 
calling  for  Pakistan  to be designated as a  state  sponsor  of 
terrorism. 

Mr.  Pallone's  resolution  noted:  ``The  Secretary  of   State, 
pursuant  to the Export Administration Act, should designate  the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan as a country the Government of which 
has repeatedly provided support for international terrorism.''

According  to Mr. Pallone, given the shared threat that the  U.S. 
and   other   countries  faced   from   international   terrorist 
organisations, the State Department was urged to explore ways  to 
step up U.S. cooperation with countries in the struggle.

The  various  clauses of the resolution noted that  reports  from 
Western  media sources had cited Pakistan as a base and  training 
ground  for terrorist groups, and that Pakistan's Government  had 
demonstrated  a  reluctance  to  halt the use  of  its  soil  for 
terrorist organisations. 

It  also  cited reports that have  implicated  Pakistan's  Inter-
Services  Intelligence (ISI) in terrorist activities, as well  as 
the international drug trade.

The  resolution also cited the fact that Pakistan was  placed  on 
the State Department's ``watch list'' of suspected state sponsors 
of  international terrorism in 1993. Numerous cases of  terrorist 
attacks or attempted terrorism, had been linked to Pakistan, many 
of  which had resulted in death or injury to Americans and  other 
Westerners, were also noted in the resolution. 

The   House  International  Relations  Committee  Chairman,   Mr. 
Benjamin  Gilman,  has also urged the Clinton  administration  to 
declare  Afghanistan's Taliban a ``terrorist movement''  and  put 
Pakistan  on notice that if it did not cut its strings  with  the 
Taliban, then the same would happen to it. 

This  was necessary to bring about stability and peace  to  South 
Asia,  the Republican Congressman said at a function in New  York 
on Wednesday held to mark India's Republic Day. 

He said China's support for both Pakistan and the Taliban was one 
more  reason  why it should not receive the most  favored  nation 
trading status from the U.S. 

- PTI, UNI
