
Rebels hold ground in Grozny 


By Vladimir Radyuhin

MOSCOW, JAN. 29. After five weeks of fierce fighting and hundreds 
of  soldiers  killed,  Russian  forces are  yet  to  break  rebel 
resistance in the Chechen capital Grozny.

The  capture of Grozny, the last rebel stronghold in the  lowland 
part  of  Chechnya, would enable Moscow to claim  that  the  main 
military  phase of the war was over and only scattered groups  of 
militants would remain to be hunted down in the mountains.

But  Chechen militants appear to be holding their ground  in  the 
capital.  The  NTV television reported on Saturday  that  Russian 
troops  were advancing at a rate of 200 metres a day in the  city 
in  furious  house-to-house  fighting. At  night,  rebels,  using 
sewers  and  tunnels, would slip behind  Russian  lines,  forcing 
federal troops to ``mop up'' the same buildings again and again.

Gen. Valery Manilov, deputy chief of the general staff, estimated 
that some 3,000 rebels were still dug in Grozny. This is the same 
number  that  confronted Russian troops at the beginning  of  the 
storming  in December, though the military claimed to have  since 
killed  hundreds  of rebels in the city.  Grozny  defenders  have 
apparently been able to get reinforcements. This week Moscow gave 
the  first  precise official figure of its forces in  Chechnya  - 
93,000  troops, who are said to be taking on about  11,000  rebel 
fighters.

Russian  losses  have soared after the  Grozny  offensive  began. 
Official  casualty  figures  released  this  week  suggest   that 
Russians  have lost 525 soldiers killed in Chechnya  during  four 
weeks of the storming of the Chechen capital.

Overall,  Moscow reported that as of January 25, 1,173 had  died, 
3,487 had been wounded, and 53 were missing, in nearly six months 
of fighting in Dagestan and Chechnya. This means that the monthly 
casualty rate for Russian troops in Chechnya is now running ahead 
of the death rate in the 1994-96. The official count for the  21-
month  first Chechen war was 3,963 soldiers and officers  killed, 
working  out  to 188 deaths a month, against 204 a month  in  the 
current campaign.

However, according to the Union of Soldiers' Mothers  Committees, 
Russian  losses today stand at 3,500 men killed and  about  6,000 
wounded.  The union has been calculating the losses on the  basis 
of reports from its regional branches.

Reuters reports:

A  group  of 54 Chechen rebels have surrendered  in  the  Chechen 
capital Grozny, the chief Russian spokesman on the conflict,  was  
quoted as saying today.

Interfax  news agency quoted Mr. Sergei Yastrzhembsky  as  saying 
that  the  group  surrendered to local  prosecutors  and  to  the 
militia  commanded by the pro-Moscow Chechen leader,  Mr.  Bislan 
Gantamirov.  Mr.  Gantamirov  said  yesterday  he  had  struck  a 
ceasefire  deal  with  groups  of rebels in  some  areas  of  the 
capital.

Interfax quoted Mr. Yastrzhembsky as saying many of the  fighters 
who handed in weapons and surrendered were badly injured and  had 
received treatment on the spot. 
