
Indonesian forces put on alert


By P. S. Suryanarayana

SINGAPORE, JAN. 29. The Indonesian military (TNI) has been put on 
high alert to prevent disturbances during the foreign tour by the 
President, Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid, who left Jakarta yesterday amid 
unabated unrest in several parts of the country. 

This  was indicated by the TNI's overall commander, Adm.  Widodo. 
The  TNI would also assist the national police. The President  is 
expected to return to Indonesia by the middle of next month.  The 
alert is a sequel to the discovery of a bomb at the Grand  Mosque 
in Yogyakarta a few days ago. The discovery was disclosed by  the 
President prior to his foreign tour. 

The latest disturbances in Central Maluku in the Spice isles, the 
theatre  of  intense communal violence involving  Christians  and 
Muslims, reportedly claimed the lives of 17 persons. 

The  Speaker  of the People's Consultative  Assembly,  Mr.  Amien 
Rais, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr.  Akbar 
Tandjung,  met Mr. Wahid prior to his departure and asked him  to 
monitor  the situation in the country on an hourly  basis  during 
his visit to 13 countries.

The  President,  as  also several  leading  politicians  and  the 
Defence  Minister, Mr. Juwono Sudarsono, have discounted  rumours 
of  any coup attempt by the TNI during Mr. Wahid's  foreign  tour 
which began yesterday with a visit to Saudi Arabia.

On a different front, the Indonesian Government-backed Commission 
on Human Rights Violations in East Timor (KPP-HAM) has  indicated 
that  it  found Gen. Wiranto, formerly the TNI commander  and  at 
present  the  Senior  Coordinating  Minister  for  Politics   and 
Security  Affairs, morally responsible for the carnage that  took 
place  in  East  Timor in September. However, it  was  not  clear 
whether  KPP-HAM,  which  was expected to submit  its  report  by 
January  31, would include Gen. Wiranto among those who might  be 
named for further investigations by the Attorney General. It  had 
already  indicated  its view that acts of  ``omission''  by  Gen. 
Wiranto  could  have been a factor at work.  The  panel  recently 
interrogated Gen. Wiranto. 

The report on the U.N.'s separate investigation of the carnage is 
also expected to be submitted to the Secretary General, Mr.  Kofi 
Annan,  on  January 31. Observers and analysts  expect  the  U.N. 
panel  to  indict  elements within the  TNI,  while  Jakarta  has 
pleaded  with  the  global  organisation  not  to  constitute  an 
international  tribunal to scrutinise the conduct  of  Indonesian 
generals.
