
''Clinton will not interfere in India's affairs''


WASHINGTON, JAN. 29. The U.S. State Department has made it  clear 
that  the  President,  Mr.  Bill Clinton's  desire  to  work  for 
defusing the crisis between India and Pakistan does not mean  any 
kind  of interference in India's affairs or, in any way,  harming 
its interest. To a question about the President's observation  to 
this  effect in his State of the Union address on  Thursday,  the 
U.S.  State Department's Deputy Director of Policy Planning,  Mr. 
James  C.  O'Brien,  on  Friday said, ``I  don't  think  he  (Mr. 
Clinton) was proposing anything that in any way runs against  the 
interests of the Indian Government.'' 

``So, I would warn you against interpreting anything he said as a 
suggestion  of U.S. meddling where it's not wanted,'' he said  to 
the  question  by an Indian journalist. He said Mr.  Clinton  had 
expressed ``a strong interest in, and intention in visiting India 
and engaging with the Indian Government, including on the  issues 
that are of concern with Pakistan. But I don't believe he will  - 
you  know,  there is no suggestion there of anything  that  would 
interfere with the Indian Government's interests.'' 

Asked  whether Mr. Clinton would visit Pakistan during his  visit 
to  South Asia in the spring, Mr. O'Brien said the  Secretary  of 
State, Ms. Madeleine Albright, would make a recommendation  about 
it. ``Obviously, the President will have to make his decision  as 
he gets closer to the time of the visit.'' 

Mr.  O'Brien,  however,  said,  ``We  have  engagement  with  the 
Pakistan  Government on a number of issues. We're very  concerned 
about its return to civilian democratic rule quickly, and in that 
sense,  deplored the notion that the Government attempted to  set 
itself  outside  the  review  of  independent  courts.  We   have 
continued engagement with them on issues of anti- terrorism, non-
proliferation and other regional concerns.'' 

When asked as to why India and Pakistan should listen to the U.S. 
advice  to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) when  it 
had failed to ratify the pact, Mr. O'Brien said the international 
norm in the CTBT provided protection for all people in the world, 
and  ``it  does  that  by laying down a  rule  that  impedes  the 
development  of nuclear weapons by forbidding a particular  means 
of developing them, the testing.'' 

The U.S. had already committed itself not to conduct those  kinds 
of  tests.  ``We're maintaining that moratorium  even  after  the 
Senate  action,  and  I  think, thus,  by  our  actions,  we  are 
reflecting a commitment to the norm that lies at the heart of the 
non-proliferation regime.'' 

The  U.S.  remained a world leader on  non-proliferation  issues. 
``We  continue  to  work  whenever there  is  a  threat  to  that 
particular  international  regime. We hope to  develop  and  then  
reinforce and enforce other international regimes.'' 

- UNI 
