
Freight train detained at Salem junction


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI, JAN. 29. Officers of the State Civil Supplies CID  today 
detained  a non-stop freight train at Salem junction to check  20 
containers carrying rice.

The  CID officials activated the dramatic operation to  stop  the 
train,  following an information that the rice in the  containers 
could be ``smuggled consignment,'' diverted from stocks meant for 
the public distribution system.The freight train originated  from 
Tuticorin    and   was   on   its   way   to   Whitefield    near 
Bangalore.However,   when   the  police  wanted  to   check   the 
consignment  by opening the sealed containers, railway  officials 
told  the police that it was not possible to break open the  seal 
without the permission of either the consignor or the consignee.

On receipt of information, the Salem Police Commissioner, Mr.  V. 
Jagannathan, the DSO and the DSP reached the station.

The  police, who wanted to check whether the consignment was  PDS 
rice,  collected  samples  of grains that had  spilled  from  the 
containers  onto  the wagon. The samples have been  sent  to  the 
local Civil Supplies Department for testing.After this, the train 
was allowed to proceed to Whitefield.

The Civil Supplies CID has requested the Container Corporation to 
unload  the rice stock at Whitefield from the containers  in  the 
presence of civil supplies officers.

Mr.  A. X. Alexander, Additional DGP (Special  Operations),  when 
contacted, said a team of officials left for Bangalore today  for 
follow up action.

Meanwhile,  Government  Railway  Police  sources  said  intensive 
checks  were  being conducted in the State to curb  smuggling  of 
rice to Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. As part of the operations, the 
personnel  today  seized about 550 kgs of rice which  were  found 
abandoned  at the Nagercoil and Tirunelveli stations.  While  250 
kgs  were seized at Nagercoil, the remaining quantity was  seized 
from Tirunelveli. No arrest has been made so far.
