
Roads: Rs. 1,400-cr. World Bank aid likely 


By Our Special Correspondent

BANGALORE,  JAN. 29. The State Government has planned  a  massive 
programme  to improve the State highways and some district  roads 
with World Bank assistance of around Rs. 1,400 crores.

The  World  Bank has deputed several teams of its  officials  for 
appraisal of loan applications submitted by the State  Government 
in   connection   with  development  works  linked   to   various 
departments.  The final approval of the bank for  the  assistance 
sought  by the State was expected to be cleared next  month.  The 
Country  Director  of  the World Bank, apart  from  other  senior 
officials, will be here to lend the finishing touches to the loan 
agreement.  The  Chief Minister, Mr. S.M.Krishna, now  in  Davos, 
will also be meeting the World Bank President.

The   Minister   for  Public  Works,  Mr.  Dharam   Singh,   told 
presspersons  here  today  that the World Bank  was  expected  to 
finance  around Rs. 1,400 crores for upgradation and  improvement 
works  of  around 1,800 km of State highways  and  some  district 
roads.  The bank had appointed Messrs. Scott and Wilson to  carry 
out  a survey of the roads that required attention and the  money 
to  be  spent  on  them. The survey report  was  expected  to  be 
submitted to the bank by March end.

He  said the State highways, which were now around 20  mm  thick, 
would be strengthened to a thickness of 80 mm and this by  itself 
would ensure that they were all-weather roads and could withstand 
heavier  axle loads. While the cost of improving the roads  would 
be  around Rs. 45 lakhs per km., the cost of upgrading the  State 
highways  into  wider and better roads  apart  from  constructing 
drainages alongside would cost Rs. 1.27 crores a km. Once all the 
highways were either improved or upgraded, there would be no need 
to maintain them for at least 20 years. The contractors concerned 
would  themselves be asked to maintain the roads for  a  specific 
period, he added.

While  Mr. Christopher Huban and Mr. Ashok Bhansal, officials  of 
the  World  Bank were here on Friday for a preliminary  round  of 
talks, the Country Director, Mr. Edwin Lim, would be here with an 
18-member team on February 8. 

Meanwhile,  the  Chief  Minister has also written  to  the  Union 
Minister  for  Surface Transport, Mr. Rajnath Singh,  to  upgrade 
four  important roads in the State into national  highways.  They 
were the Jewargi (Gulbarga district)-Sankeshwar (Belgaum) stretch 
of 270 km, and the Bijapur-Hubli stretch of 191 km, the  Kalamala 
(Raichur district) - Ginigara (Koppal district) stretch of 167 km 
and  the  Bidar-Hiriyur section (529 km) of the  proposed  Bidar-
Srirangapatna  national  highway  of  740  km.  Asked  about  the 
national  highways  approved for the State last year,  Mr.  Singh  
said  the  work  on the upgradation of the  existing  roads  into 
highways would commence in the coming financial year. 
