
TNCC(I) welcomes Moopanar's decision


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN.  29. Welcoming the TMC's decision to  support  the 
AIADMK-led   front   in  the  byelections,  Mr.   Tindivanam   K. 
Ramamurthy, TNCC(I) president, today, attributed this development 
to  the  ongoing  discussion  between  the  Congress(I)  and  TMC 
leaders.

Addressing a press conference, Mr. Ramamurthy said it was  common 
knowledge   that  the  Congress(I)  and  TMC  leaders  had   been 
discussing various issues including coordination between the  two 
parties and the TMC's support to the AIADMK led front was part of 
the larger game plan.

``You have to wait and see,'' said the TNCC(I) chief in reply  to 
a  question  on whether the ongoing deliberations would  lead  to 
merger of the TMC with the Congress(I). He said that  Congress(I) 
leaders,  not only in Tamil Nadu, but also in the  high  command, 
welcomed  the  return of Mr. Moopanar and the TMC to  the  parent 
body.  ``We all know that though Mr. Moopanar's soul is with  the 
TMC, his heart is with the Congress(I),'' Mr. Ramamurthy said.

However, Mr. Ramamurthy refused to buy a suggestion that the  TMC 
and the Congress(I) had come closer on account of the efforts  of 
the  AIADMK. The frequent meeting between the AICC(I)  president, 
Mrs.  Sonia Gandhi and Mr. G. K. Moopanar, TMC president and  the 
discussion between Mr. Gulam Nabi Azad, AICC(I) general secretary 
and  Mr. Moopanar were aimed at bringing the two  parties  closer 
and  the  TMC's  support to the AIADMK was  an  outcome  of  this 
development. Mr. Ramamurthy said that the TNCC(I) partymen  would 
work unitedly with those of the TMC for the success of the AIADMK 
candidates in all the three constituencies.

When  pointed out that the TMC was born out of opposition to  the 
AIADMK, Mr. Ramamurthy said it was not against AIADMK as a  party 
but  against corruption. The electorate of Tamil Nadu  had  given 
their  verdict on this issue in the elections in 1996,  1998  and 
1999.  One could not afford to harp on the subject of  corruption 
for ever. 

Now  that  the  TMC had made openly some  charges  of  corruption 
against the DMK Government, what was wrong in the TMC choosing to 
fight against the DMK which had aligned with communal forces?  he 
asked.

The  TNCC(I)  chief  said  that  the  `sangalp  yatra'  had  been 
completed in Tamil Nadu and it also helped the ongoing membership 
enrolment campaign.

Our Madurai Staff Reporter writes: The Tamil Nadu Janata Dal  has 
welcomed the decision of TMC to extend support to the AIADMK. 

Issuing  a  press statement in this regard, Mr.  K.  John  Moses, 
State  General Secretary, said the decision of TMC leader Mr.  G. 
K.  Moopanar in this regard `is an appropriate decision.' It,  he 
added,  would  help defeat anti-secular forces.  Mr.  Moses  also 
asked  Dr. Sethuraman, the founder leader of  Moovender  Munnetra 
Kazhagam and Dr. Krishnaswamy of Pudia Tamizhagam, to review  the 
decision of fielding candidates in assembly constituencies.
