
CM for Constitutional changes 


By Our Staff Reporter

VELLORE,  JAN. 29. The Chief Minister, Mr. M.  Karunanidhi  today 
expressed  support for the proposed Constitutional changes  aimed 
at  perpetuating the Federal set-up under which the Centre  would 
depend  on  the collective strength of the States,  in  order  to 
sustain the unity and strength of the nation.

Inaugurating  the `Uzhavar Santhai' (farmers' market) at  Vellore 
and  Katpadi, the Chief Minister made a reference to the  request 
made earlier by the Union Minister of State for Health, Mr. N. T. 
Shanmugam,  to  him and the State Health Minister, Mr.  Arcot  N. 
Veerasamy,  to  take steps for starting  the  Government  Medical 
College in Vellore. ``A Central Minister is placing a demand with 
the  State Minister. The days of State Ministers  beseeching  the 
Central  Ministers are gone. We want this situation  to  continue 
forever.  That is why we want changes in the  Constitution,''  he 
said.

The  Chief  Minister said it was not proper on the  part  of  the 
opponents  of the proposal for Constitutional changes to raise  a 
big  hue and cry about it merely because the BJP wanted a  review 
of  the  Constitution.  He said Dr. B. R. Ambedkar,  one  of  the 
founding fathers of the Constitution, had himself stated that  if 
the  Constitution  contained statutes that stood in  the  way  of 
people's  welfare  and  the  development  of  the  nation,  these 
statutes could be changed.

Even  leaders  like Periyar and Anna had stated  that  there  was 
nothing wrong in changing the law if it was necessary to  fulfill 
the  needs of the people. ``It is our responsibility to see  that 
the  talk  of  Constitutional changes did  not  remain  mere  lip 
service but was translated into action,'' he said.

The  Chief Minister said a turnover of Rs. 4,23,02,137  has  been 
made  so  far in all the `Uzhavar Santhais' in  the  State.  This 
reflected  the  growing  patronage  for  the  markets  among  the 
residents  of  the towns where they have been  started,  as  they 
eliminated the menace of middlemen and commission agents.

The  Chief  Minister said while the `Uzhavar Santhai'  opened  at 
Vellore  was  the 18th in the State; the  Government  would  open 
within  the next seven or eight months the remaining  82  markets 
out of the 100 proposed to be started.

Mr.  N. T. Shanmugam said the formalities for clearance  for  the 
Government  Medical College in Vellore by the Medical Council  of 
India were nearing completion. He, therefore, requested the State 
Health Minister to take steps for starting the college.

State health Minister, Mr. Veerasamy, said if the Union  Minister  
could  ensure  immediate  clearance for the  Medical  College  in 
Tuticorin,  the  Chief Minister's orders on the starting  of  the 
medical college in Vellore would be automatically implemented.

He  said a sum of Rs. 2.5 crores had been allotted initially  for 
the `Varumun Kappom Thittam' in the State. 

A total of 5,22,653 persons have been treated and a sum of Rs. 20 
lakhs  spent in these camps so far. It has been proposed to  hold 
8,400 such camps, he said.

The  PWD  Minister, Mr. Durai Murugan,  said  `Anna  Marumalarchi 
Thittam'   and   `Namakku  Naame  Thittam'   had   ensured   that 
developmental activities were continuing in the Districts.

The  Housing  Minister,  Mr. K. Pichandi, Arakkonam  MP,  Dr.  S. 
Jagathrakshakan,  Ranipet  MLA,  Mr. R. Gandhi,  and  WAKF  Board 
member, Mr. T. A. Mohammed Saqy also spoke.
