
Union Minister criticises TMC 


By Our Staff Reporter

TIRUCHI,  JAN  29.  The  Union  Power  Minister,  Mr   Rangarajan 
Kumaramangalam,  today criticised the TMC's decision  to  support 
the  AIADMK  in  the byelections despite  Mr  Moopanar's  earlier 
pronouncements on keeping both the communal and corrupt forces at 
equi-distance.

He  was speaking at a workers meeting of the National  Democratic 
Alliance  organised here in view of the by-elections.  A  ``false 
propaganda''  was  being  carried out to portray  the  BJP  as  a 
communal  party  though there has been no  incident  of  communal 
violence  in  the  country  during  the  100  days  of   Vajpayee 
government,  he said and called upon the NDA partners  to  defeat 
the ``smear campaign.''

PMK `blames' DMK

Our  Madurai  Staff  Reporter  writes:  ``The  DMK  deserves  the 
treatment  it received from TMC,'' said  Dr.S.Ramadoss,  founder-
leader  of  Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK), while  reacting  to  the 
TMC's decision to support the AIADMK in the forthcoming  Assembly 
by-elections in the state.

Talking  to  reporters  here today, the  PMK  leader  called  the 
decision  of  Mr.Moopanar an act  of  `friendship-ditching,'  and 
blamed the DMK for having blatantly pampered the TMC. He said DMK 
alone  had  helped TMC become the main Opposition  in  the  State 
Assembly  and got 20 MP seats in two Parliament elections.  Above 
all, the TMC got a whopping 36 per cent share in the alliance for 
local body elections.

The decision of Mr.Moopanar would not make any difference in  the 
forthcoming  elections.  Dr.Ramadoss, however, asked the  TMC  to 
give  up  the seats which it won with the support of DMK  in  the 
State before pulling out from the Pondicherry Government. 

While  reiterating  that the existing alliance in  NDA  would  be 
continued for Assembly polls in 2001 in the State, the PMK leader 
said, his party would demand a `minimum of 10 Assembly seats'  in 
southern districts. 

Vaiko assails TMC:

Our   Tirunelveli  Staff  Reporter  writes:  The   MDMK   general 
secretary, Mr. Vaiko, MP, denounced the TMC for extending support 
to the AIADMK. He said `the TMC president, Mr.G.K.Moopanar,  will 
regret his decision in the future'.

In a chat with press persons in Tirunelveli today, Mr. Vaiko said 
Mr.  Moopanar's  explanation that his party  was  supporting  the  
AIADMK `in the larger interest of consolidation of secular votes' 
was  only  to divert the attention of the people  from  the  main 
issues. 

Mr.  Vaiko said with the TMC extending support to the AIADMK,  it 
had  become easy for the NDA to expose the  `opportunist  forces' 
which  supported corruption from behind the screen.  The  present 
political scenario will immensely help the NDA in the State.

The  MDMK was in the AIADMK alliance in the 1998 elections,  with 
the  objective of making Mr. Vajpayee the Prime Minister  and  to 
prevent  the Congress from coming to power. The decision,  forced 
due to circumstances, damaged the credibility of the MDMK to some 
extent at that time and the party repented for the mistake later, 
he added.

Referring to the statement of Mr. Moopanar that this  arrangement 
was only for the by-elections, Mr. Vaiko said this only reflected 
how  confused he was and also showed how he could not digest  his 
own decision of extending support `voluntarily' to the AIADMK.
