
Pondy TMC welcomes party support to AIADMK


By Our Staff Reporter

PONDICHERRY,  JAN. 29. The Pondicherry TMC president  and  former 
Home Minister, Mr. P. Kannan, MLA today said the Pondicherry unit 
of the party welcomed wholeheartedly the decision of its leader, 

Mr.  G. K. Moopanar, and the high command to extend  the  TMC-led 
alliance's  support  to the AIADMK in the by-elections  to  Tamil 
Nadu Assembly.

Addressing  a hurriedly-convened press conference in here  today, 
Mr.  Kannan said Mr. Moopanar's decision was in keeping with  the 
party's decision to keep the interests of people at large.

Mr.  Kannan  said  the present stand of the TMC  to  support  the 
AIADMK   nominees   in   the   next   month's   by-election   was 
wholeheartedly  welcomed by all wings of the TMC in  Pondicherry. 
Mr.  Kannan said the Pondicherry unit would also  participate  in 
the campaign in the by-elections.

Mr.  Kannan  said  it was not correct to say  that  the  TMC  was 
following different policies, one for Pondicherry and another for 
Tamil Nadu. Mr. Moopanar would take appropriate decisions as  far 
as Pondicherry was concerned at appropriate time.

He  said his party leader had already made it clear that the  TMC 
should  not  be  held  responsible for  the  dissolution  of  the 
Assembly,  as  if it withdrew support the  DMK  Government  would 
fall.

The question of forming alternative government was the collective 
responsible  of  like-minded parties and not for  TMC  alone,  he 
said.  To  another  question,  he  said,  the  formation  of   an 
alternative government might take place before the next budget.

Mr.   Kannan  said  that  Pondicherry  PCC(I)  leader,   Mr.   P. 
Shanmugham, had already made it clear that it was for the AICC(I) 
president,  Mrs.  Sonia Gandhi, and Mr. Moopanar  to  decide  the 
formation of the alternative administration.

Mr.Kannan  said that the TMC was very firm that  the  Territorial 
Assembly should not be destabilised as much as the government  as 
a whole.

Asked  if there was any hitch in deciding the incumbent  for  the 
Chief  Minister's  post, in the event of a  new  government,  Mr. 
Kannan said he was not at all in the race and had repeatedly said 
that he was not after any office or post.
