
TMC whip quits Assembly seat 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 29. Even as some senior TMC leaders  today  denied 
any  dissension  in the party over its decision  to  support  the 
AIADMK in the coming by-elections, Mr. R. Chokkar, party whip  in 
the  Assembly,  has resigned his membership  of  the  Legislature 
protesting the party's decision.

Mr.  Chokkar told The Hindu that he had met Mr. G.  K.  Moopanar, 
party president, last evening and conveyed his decision. ``I have 
not resigned from the party,'' he said.

Meanwhile,  senior TMC leaders, at a press conference  held  here 
today,  said  the leadership had taken the  decision  only  after 
ascertaining   the  views  of  the  leaders,  functionaries   and 
activists  individually  and collectively. ``We have  faith  that 
whatever  decision  Mr.  Moopanar took would  be  in  the  larger 
interest   of  Tamil  Nadu,  the  party  and   partymen   without 
involvement of any self-interest,'' said Mr. D. Sudarsanam,  MLA, 
treasurer  and  Mr. S. G. Vinayagamurthy, vice-president  of  the 
party.

Mr.  Sudarsanam dismissed as baseless certain remarks  attributed 
to  him in a vernacular daily, suggesting disagreement  over  the 
decision of the leadership.

Mr.  Chokkar, in his resignation letter to the Speaker,  said  he 
felt  that the party leader (Mr. Moopanar) was pressured by  many 
in  the  top  rung  of the organisation  to  take  this  decision 
(support to the AIADMK) against his conscience. He recalled  that 
Mr. Moopanar used to tell partymen that if a sacrifice had to  be 
made in the interest of partymen, he would make it first. ``I  do 
not  want  any  post got by mortgaging the self  respect  of  the 
leader and the party,'' he said.

Mr.  Chokkar  said  that he had resigned his  membership  of  the 
Assembly  as  he felt it as a burden at this  juncture  when  the 
decision of the party had gone against the mandate of the people, 
``only  because some TMC leaders have fallen a prey to  the  lust 
for  power.'' However, his respect for Mr. Moopanar would not  be 
diminished by any twist in the party.

Mr.  K.  S. Alagiri, MLA and general secretary, said  the  senior 
partymen  like Mr. P. Chidambaram, D. Sudarsanam and himself  had 
been  with Mr. Moopanar for more than two decades and  they  knew 
fully well that their leader would not take any decision contrary 
to  the sentiments of partymen. Mr. Moopanar was never guided  by 
ulterior  motives  including  personal interests  or  yielded  to 
pressure, while taking crucial decisions, he added.

Mr.  Peter  Alphonse,  MP  and  general  secretary,  said  before  
arriving  at  the decision even leaders who were out  of  Chennai 
were  consulted over the telephone. It was nothing but a  figment 
of  imagination  to  say  that  there  was  dissension  over  the 
decision.

Meanwhile,  the  Pondicherry unit of the TMC  has  supported  the 
party's  decision.  The  unit  president,  Mr.  P.  Kannan,  told 
pressmen that the entire party reposed faith in the leadership of 
Mr. Moopanar and stood by his decisions.
