
Police official hurt in tribal attack 


By Our Staff Reporter

ELURU,  JAN. 29. The Kovvur Deputy Superintendent of Police,  Mr. 
D.  Narsing  Rao,  today  suffered  head  injuries  when  tribals 
attacked  a  police  party at Cheguntapalli  near  Polavaram  for 
raiding  their  village  and arresting a few  on  the  charge  of 
gambling.  The Tallapudi Sub- Inspector, Mr.  Muralikrishna,  the 
jeep  driver, Mr. Mariadas, and a constable, Mr. Ramu, were  also 
injured in the attack. The tribals detained a Sub-Inspector,  Mr. 
Raja Rao, and three constables after the incident.

According  to  reports,  a  team  comprising  four  SIs  and   20 
constables, led by Mr. Narsing Rao, raided Cheguntapalli  village 
around  noon.  The  police team came across  a  group  of  people 
playing  cards and also noticed a few fowls. As the  police  were 
returning  with  the arrested, tribals  including  women  blocked 
their  way  by placing logs and attacked them with  sticks  after 
throwing chilli powder.

The  police  left  behind  two vehicles  and  returned  with  the 
injured.  The  tribals detained the four policemen  demanding  an 
assurance  from  the revenue authorities that no  case  would  be 
booked against them for the incident. They wanted the MRO or  the 
RDO  to  negotiate  the release of the policemen.  The  RDO,  Mr. 
Sridhar, was camping at Polavaram.

The  Deputy  Inspector-General of Police, Mr.  P.  Chandrasekhara 
Reddy,   who   monitored   the  situation  from   here   as   the 
Superintendent of Police, Mr. Ravi Gupta, was away, said two VAOs 
and  the MRO, Mr. Bhaskara Choudary, had gone to the  village  to 
talk  to the tribals. According to him, the police  party  raided 
the gambling den near Cheguntapalli and seized a few fowls and  a 
liquor  container.  When the police tried to  arrest  the  people 
responsible  for  the  sport, they retaliated  and  attacked  the 
policemen.

The  police party was said to have refrained from using force  to 
avoid a major confrontation. The size of the mob was larger  than 
the police party. Moreover, many villagers were said to have been 
in an inebriated condition.

The tribals said police had beaten up a handicapped youth  during 
the raid, which angered the villagers. The negotiating team which 
went  to  the  village had tried to  contact  their  leader,  Mr. 
Muchika  Arjunudu.  The  revenue and  police  officers  said  the 
situation was peaceful.
