
CGHS: No relief for beneficiaries 


By S. Shanker

CHENNAI, JAN. 29. The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)  on 
which  retirees and in-service Government employees alike  depend 
for medicare, appears to be an ailing behemoth in Chennai, due to 
shortage of doctors and untimely supply of medicines.

Modelled  on  the lines of the United Kingdom's  National  Health 
Service, its beneficiaries range from senior government servants, 
IAS  and  IPS  officials,  MPs,  judges,  freedom  fighters   and 
pensioners besides their dependents.

There  are  over 42,000 CGHS card-holders and  the  beneficiaries 
exceed 1.65 lakh persons in the city.

The  facilities  include  in-patient/out-patient  treatment   and 
access  to the best treatment offered in the private sector.  The 
partnership  with the private sector involves 20  city  hospitals 
and  the charges are paid by the CGHS. Nine Government  Hospitals 
are also included in this venture, initiated in 1997.

Pensioners,   who  are  the  main  beneficiaries,   welcome   the 
collaboration  but complain that the hospitals are  permitted  to 
collect  charges exceeding the ``approved rates.'' They are  told 
that the rates were submitted in 1995 but they came to effect  in 
1997 requiring collection of the ``cost escalation.''

Mr.  A.  V.  Venkataraman,  a  pensioner,  says  the  scheme   is 
invaluable  as it would otherwise have been difficult for him  to 
provide  treatment  to his wife, a cancer patient. But  the  ill-
stocked    pharmacies    were    causing    hardship    to    the 
beneficiaries.

Only  one  local  chemist firm is on contract  to  serve  the  14 
dispensaries though earlier each dispensary had its own  chemist. 
This problem seems to have resulted from an ``audit  objection.'' 
The  stores at the dispensaries, however, receive their  supplies 
from  the Medical Supplies Depot (MSD), which officials said  did 
not cater to even 25 per cent of their requirements.

The chemist firm has to reimburse bills presented by patients, if 
it cannot supply the required drugs. One of the allegations  from 
the  patients is that, on many occasions, drugs  are  substituted 
against specialists' prescriptions.

For   the  14  city  CGHS  dispensaries,  there  are  only   four 
specialists  against a sanctioned strength of 17. Similarly,  the 
expected   strength  of  67  doctors  is  short  by  15   medical 
professionals.  At the city dispensaries, especially in the  K.K. 
Nagar polyclinic, patients wait for hours to meet the doctors. On 
an   average,  about  250  out-patients  visit   the   dispensary  
daily.

Four doctors, apart from the one in-charge, who has to look after 
the  preparation of referral sanctions and  administrative  work, 
attend on patients.

Medicines  are  hard to get at the dispensaries. In  some  cases, 
they  are  purchased by the beneficiaries, many  of  whom  cannot 
afford  to  pay cash for the costly drugs, and  reimbursement  is 
sought later, though the dispensaries do obtain the medicines for 
patients.

The  Additional Director, CGHS, Chennai, Dr. M. V.  Ranga  Reddy, 
said  that  the reimbursement could be sought at  his  office  as 
well,  and ``emergency requisition slips'' were provided  at  the 
dispensaries for purchase of medicine within 24 hours.

Vacancies  arising due to study leave and  permanent  absenteeism 
could  not be construed as shortage as they were ``still  on  the 
rolls.'' Conceding that some specialist positions were vacant for 
years,  he said the Directorate was looking into it. It had  also 
recently permitted appointment of individual chemists for each of 
the dispensaries. Denying that reimbursement claims were  pending 
since   1998,   he  said  whatever  was  pending   was   awaiting 
``headquarter's  sanction,''  a situation that does  not  provide 
much relief for the beneficiaries.
