
'HC against permanent shops in uzhavar sandhai' 


By Our Special Correspondent

CHENNAI,  JAN. 29. A Division Bench of the Madras High Court  has 
ordered  that  farmers should not be allowed  to  have  permanent 
shops  in  the `uzhavar sandhai' (farmers shandy), coming  up  at 
R.S. Puram in Coimbatore city.

Disposing of a public interest litigation against the setting  up 
of  the  market  on a 1.58 acre land on Cowly  Brown  Road,  R.S. 
Puram,  on the ground that it would cause pollution  and  traffic 
congestion,  the Bench asked the municipal officials to keep  the 
area  ``clean  and tidy'' and remove the waste  ``every  now  and 
then''.  The  farmers  would be allowed to  sell  their  products 
between 6 a.m and 11 a.m, the Bench noted.

The  petitioners, all residents of Coimbatore said the  ``uzhavar 
sandhai'' had been proposed to be set up by the local authorities 
in the land, which had been earmarked as educational zone in  the 
master  plan under the Town and Country Planning Act. This  meant 
the   property  could  be  used  for  educational   institutions, 
libraries or single person quarters; and no other use. Any change 
in the use was not permitted, other than as prescribed under  due 
legal procedure, the Bench noted. Also, there were many hospitals 
and schools in the area, and if the market was started, it  would 
cause pollution and traffic congestion.

The  Government  Pleader submitted that the  ``uzhavar  sandhai'' 
would  benefit farmers, by enabling them to sell  their  products 
directly  without  middlemen.  The  market  would  function  only 
between 6 a.m and 11 a.m and farmers would not be allowed to sell 
their products in the shandy after 11 a.m.

The Bench comprising the Chief Justice Mr. K.G. Balakrishnan  and 
Mr.  Justice  K.  Govindarajan  said if  at  all  there  was  any 
pollution,  it could be avoided by proper cleaning  by  municipal 
staff.  As  regards  alleged violation of the  Town  and  Country 
Planning  Act,  the Bench said it did not find any force  in  the 
argument, as under the relevant zone it was mentioned that  petty 
shops  dealing in daily essentials like provisions, soft  drinks, 
cigarettes, newspapers and milk could be permitted in the zone.

The  proposed  site was within the city  corporation,  which  was 
lying  vacant  for  a  long  time.  The  authorities  must   have 
considered  all  the  facts, including public  welfare  and  easy 
approach to the market.

``Therefore, we do not think that starting the agriculture market 
would in any way cause environmental pollution,'' the Bench  said 
and disposed of the petition with the directions.
