
Review for better governance: Joshi 


By Our Staff Reporter

KOTTAYAM,  JAN. 29. The Centre's proposal to set up a  commission 
to  review  the Constitution was part of an effort  to  create  a 
system  least affected by human failures, according to the  Union 
Minister  for  Human  Resource Development,  Dr.  Murali  Manohar 
Joshi.

Speaking to presspersons here today, Dr. Joshi said that after 50 
years  of  the  formation  of  the  Republic  of  India,  it   is 
appropriate to have a look at the strengths and weaknesses of the 
`basic  document'  which  has been amended 79 times.  ``It  is  a 
living  and  dynamic  document and the nation has  to  think  and 
ponder  whether the objectives laid down in the Preamble  of  the 
Constitution  have  been  pursued  and how  far  they  have  been 
fulfilled  and  also  whether  there is  a  systemic  failure  in 
providing  justice,  social and economic, to the poorest  of  the 
poor.''  In an apparent comment on the Presidential remarks,  Dr. 
Joshi said ``even if it is a human failure, as argued by some, we 
have to create a system least affected by human failures.''

Observing that ``a periodic check-up of our system is an exercise 
to  keep the immunity intact,'' Dr. Joshi said that  the  country 
was  facing  challenges both from within and outside.  ``We  must 
have  a system of governance which enables the nation to  measure 
up to the challenges. 

There have been comments on the functioning of the Constitutional 
bodies,  judiciary,  bureaucracy and Parliament, and  the  people 
want the functioning of these organs for the rapid achievement of 
the  goals defined in the Preamble. We have also to  see  whether 
there are healthy relationships between the Centre and States and 
the spirit of Federalism sustained by the unity and integrity  of 
the  country,'' he said. Dr. Joshi, who repeatedly asserted  that 
the  basic  features  of  the  Constitution  cannot  be  changed, 
however,  maintained  that a change-over from the  present  Prime 
Ministerial  system to a Presidential system did not amount to  a 
change in the basic features. The review of the Constitution  was 
one of the election promises of the National Democratic  Alliance 
(NDA),  and  the  NDA agenda does  not  talk  about  Presidential 
system,  he  added.  The  Minister  came  down  heavily  on   the 
Congress(I)  and Left parties for criticising the  proposal.  The 
Congress(I)  had  no  right to talk about  the  sanctity  of  the 
Constitution. ``The party had imposed emergency, raised the  life 
of  the  House from five to six years,  imposed  draconian  laws, 
suspended  fundamental rights, all in order to circumvent a  High 
Court  judgment,'' he said. ``If there is any chance of  imposing 
dictatorial  regime,  it  is with the Congress.  We  have  fought 
against dictatorial regime of Mrs. Gandhi and we are committed to 
the basic features of the Constitution,'' he added. According  to 
him,  the  Congress(I)  had  vested  interest  in  the   unstable  
political situation in the country. ``They have destabilised many 
State  Governments and four Central Governments in the  past  and 
any attempt to have a stable political system does not suit their 
designs,'' Dr. Joshi alleged.
