
Naxals blast police station building


By Our Staff Reporter

ANANTAPUR,  JAN. 29. Naxalites belonging to the outlawed  CPI(ML) 
People's  War  Group  blasted a new  building  meant  for  police 
station  at  Vajrakarur, a mandal headquarters about 65  km  from 
here, in the district in the wee hours of Saturday. There was  no 
loss of life.

Fifteen  to  20 armed naxalites belonging to the  Penna  Ahobilam 
dalam  went to the building which was completed recently,  around 
1.30  am  and  detonated it after  planting  gelatine  sticks  in 
buckets, police said. The building was damaged.

The  naxalites  left a note at the site stating that  it  was  in 
retaliation  for  the killing of Mr. Nalla Adireddy in  a  ``fake 
encounter''  in  Karimnagar  district a  couple  of  months  ago. 
Police,  who went to the blast site only in the morning, found  a 
bucket  used  for planting the gelatine sticks and  an  axe  left 
behind by the naxalites.

The  Superintendent of Police, Mr. V.R.K. Mohan Rao, who  visited 
the blast site, said the naxalites would not achieve anything  by 
blasting  buildings  of  police  stations  and  other  government 
buildings. 

He stated that they had identified that the gelatine sticks  used 
in the blast were manufactured at Vellore in Tamil Nadu.

He  said  combing operations by special police parties  would  be 
intensified in the area to check the spread of naxal activities.

The  building  was constructed at an estimated cost  of  Rs.  3.6 
lakhs a few hundred metres away from the village. 

The  police  station is now housed in a private building  in  the 
village.

Last month when the naxalites called for state-wide bandh for two 
days  the  police received threatening calls  that  the  building 
would be blasted. 

Then  security was arranged at the building but it was  withdrawn 
after the bandh.

Naxalites made a futile attempt to blast the Uravakonda telephone 
exchange during the two-day bandh in December. 

The  torching  of  a  microwave  station  at  Regulapadu  between 
Uravakonda and Vajrakarur in November 1993 was the first  violent 
act of the naxalites in the area.
