
J & K Govt., employees on collision course


By Our Special Correspondent

JAMMU,  JAN. 29. With the failure of the latest effort to  hammer 
out  a solution to end the 40-day-old strike by State  Government 
employees,  the  Government  and  the  Employees'  Joint   Action 
Committee  (EJAC) are headed for a showdown, with the  Government 
having initiated the process of fresh recruitments.

The  EJAC has been demanding the release of cash payments  of  DA 
installments due from January 1999, the second installment of the 
Fifth  Pay Commission implementation and an increase in  the  age 
limit for retirement. 

The  National  Conference-led Government of Dr.  Farooq  Abdullah 
announced on Friday its decision to go for fresh recruitments and 
implement the Fifth Pay Commission recommendation to downsize the 
administration by 30 per cent.

Though  the  Chief  Minister did not spell this out  in  as  many 
words,  highly placed sources told The Hindu that the process  to 
engage  people  in  Class- IV posts on  a  short-term  basis  has 
already  been initiated. The Employment Department has also  been 
asked  to furnish the list of the unemployed educated  youth  who 
have  registered themselves in the employment  exchange.  Sources 
said  the Services Selection Board (SSB) has been asked  to  make 
available the list of candidates who have applied for the post of 
stenographers.  Moreover, a list of the employees who  are  being 
transferred  to  the Secretariat from districts,  is  also  being 
finalised. 

In  its last meeting the State Cabinet had made  the  Secretariat 
Services  transferable  in  a bid to scuttle  the  strike  plans, 
mainly  initiated by the Secretariat employees. The  decision  to 
recruit stenographers and orderlies is seen as an effort to teach 
the  employees - who are ``not ready to realise the  problems  of 
the State'' - a lesson.Meanwhile, the EJAC has reiterated that it 
would  not  be deterred by the threat of harsh measures  and  the 
strike  would continue till their demands are conceded.  Hundreds 
of employees held a demonstration here near the Ahata Amar  Singh 
Government quarters and demanded the release of 278 employees who 
have  been arrested under the Essential Services Maintenance  Act 
(ESMA). 
