
Can't a hundred flowers bloom? 


The view that the CPI(M) needs to open up and be more tolerant of 
dissenting  voices  is beginning to spread even if many  are  not 
speaking out openly, says HASAN SUROOR.

IF  THE CPI(M) leadership were to be believed the party  couldn't 
have  been in better shape and reports about dissensions  are  at 
best a media creation and, at worst, enemy propaganda. The claim, 
however, does not square up with the more detached opinion within 
and outside the party and even allowing for exaggeration there is 
no  getting away from the growing restlesness among the rank  and 
file.

Dissent may not be the right description of the mood in the party 
but there is certainly a great deal of concern over its style  of 
functioning,  and the issue of internal democracy is  threatening 
to take a serious turn. The view that the party needs to open  up 
and be more tolerant of dissenting voices is beginning to spread, 
even if not many are speaking out openly.

The  leadership  would  be making a  mistake  in  dismissing  Mr. 
Saifuddin  Chaudhury as an aberration. For the issues  raised  by 
him  go  beyond individual concerns though these  may  have  been 
personalised  because  of  his own difficulties  with  the  party 
bureaucracy. He sees himself as a ``victim'' of the  ``prevailing 
culture'' which, he fears, might damage the party in the long run 
if not checked quickly.

Every  time  the issue of more internal democracy is  raised  the 
CPI(M) leadership responds by saying that no other party is  more 
democratic  than  it,  and that no decision is  taken  without  a 
thorough debate at various levels. Minority opinion is allowed to 
be aired freely in appropriate party fora, but once a decision is 
taken  everyone - including those who have a different  point  of 
view - is expected to accept it.

``Democratic  centralism'',  according  to  party  theoreticians, 
takes care of divergent viewpoints and to allege that the  CPI(M) 
is  a  ``closed'' party where the minority view is  shut  out  is 
sheer  disinformation. But ultimately the majority  view  counts, 
and  they contend that it is a measure of the party's  democratic 
credentials  that even senior leaders such as Mr. Jyoti Basu  and 
Mr.  Harkishan  Singh Surjeet were outvoted on  the  question  of 
joining the Central Government. And, they accepted the verdict.

``There  is no question of shutting out views but certainly  what 
we don't encourage is that comrades should air their  differences 
in public. Once an issue has been settled after a debate there is 
no  reason  why  we  should go public  with  our  own  individual 
views,'' a senior party leader said.

On the face of it, few would quarrel with this formulation and to  
some  extent  it  is  true that there is a  lot  more  debate  in 
communist  parties than in allegedly more democratic parties  but 
the  story  goes beyond this. Insiders say that the party  has  a 
long  memory  and  seldom forgets those  who  speak  against  the 
official line during the so-called ``open'' debate. It is alleged 
that  those who are not converted to the party line are  harassed 
in  order to ``deter'' others. ``What kind of democracy is  it,'' 
asks a former ``comrade''.

The most common method, it is alleged, is to accuse the dissenter 
of  having ``links with the enemy'' and then destroy him. A  one-
time  senior  leader  and  Rajya  Sabha  member,  Mr.  Nepal  Deb 
Bhattacharya, was thrown out on the charge of hobnobbing with the 
``enemy''  and he was not given a chance to explain his case,  it 
is  pointed out. The same charge was made against  Mr.  Saifuddin 
Chaudhury   -  he  was  said  to  have  ``hobnobbed''  with   the 
Congress(I)  in 1993 when the CPI(M)'s official position  was  to 
oppose the party with the same zeal as the BJP.Mr. Chaudhury  was 
dropped from the party's central committee and denied ticket  for 
the  1996  Lok Sabha elections as a punishment for  advocating  a 
softer line towards the Congress(I) vis-a-vis the BJP, though two 
years later the CPI(M) ended up doing exactly the same thing.  In 
fact,  it  went  a  step  further  and  actively  worked,  though 
unsuccesfully, to instal a Congress(I) Government after  bringing 
down the Vajpayee Ministry.

The party has of course explained it saying that the new line was 
dictated by the changed political situation with the BJP emerging 
as a bigger danger. Far from admitting that it had made a mistake 
in  1993 and failed to see the danger from the BJP, the party  is 
still pursuing the ``case'' against Mr. Chaudhury. Even if he  is 
finally  let  off with a warning his position in the  party  will 
never be the same again.

Two  others  -  the West Bengal Transport  Minister,  Mr.  Subhas 
Chakraborty,  and the district secretary of North  24  Paraganas, 
Mr.  Samir  Putatunda  - have been reprimanded  for  calling  for 
greater democracy within the party; and a ``rectification'' drive 
is on to bring the ``heretics'' back on track.

Individual  cases apart, there is the larger issue of the  CPI(M) 
refusing  to  adjust its style to the demands  of  a  multi-party 
system.  Even  as  it has been quick to learn some  of  the  more 
dubious  tricks  of survival in a  parliamentary  democracy,  its 
internal functioning still remains in a Stalinist mould. For  all 
the  apparent  show of ``democratic centralism'',  the  party  is 
still  run very much by a handful of apparatchik - in New  Delhi, 
Calcutta and Thiruvanthapuram.

``Hardliners''  brought up on the Soviet model lay down the  line 
and  others are expected to either accept it or prove that it  is 
wrong. It is not a coincidence that despite the debate at various 
levels  the line that invariably prevails eventually is  what  is 
laid  down by the ``hardliners''. Whether it was the question  of 
approach  to the Congress(I) in 1993 or its reversal in 1998  the  
apparatchik  had  their way; as indeed they did on the  issue  of 
joining the Central Government.

The  rise  of  the Trinamul Congress in  West  Bengal,  initially 
dismissed  by the CPI(M) leadership as a flash in the  pan,  owes 
itself to the widespread disillusionment with the CPI(M) not only 
among  the people but also within the party's own ranks. A  large 
number  of CPI(M) members particularly in Midnapore  and  Hooghly 
are  reported to have joined the Trinamul Congress; and even  the 
friends  of  the  CPI(M)  fear that more  would  follow  once  an 
alternative to it becomes real.

With the Trinmul Congress beginning to make its presence felt  in 
the  rural  areas, the writing on the wall is clear  to  everyone 
except those who preside over the CPI(M)'s affairs. The  question 
which  they should be asking themselves is: how do  they  explain 
the rise of the Trinamul Congress in their own backyard, and  how 
to  contain  it?  Instead, the axe is falling on  those  who  are 
asking the right questions.
