
The junta scores 


The  military  junta in Myanmar is basking in the sunshine  of  a 
success  story  that was, in some measure, made possible  by  the 
diplomatic  pressure  it  exerted on Bangkok  during  the  latest 
crisis, says P. S. SURYANARAYANA.

THE  FIGHT against anti-State terrorism is an issue that  enables 
Myanmar's  military Government to make common ``cause'' with  the 
larger international community with a degree of ``comfort level'' 
despite  the  periodic  Western  moves  to  isolate  Yangon.  Not 
surprisingly,  Myanmar's  governing State Peace  and  Development 
Council  (SPDC) has found itself on the winning side  during  the 
latest  seizure  of a hospital complex in Thailand by a  band  of 
rebels  opposed  to  the Yangon junta  itself  and  the  decisive 
counter-terrorist action that Bangkok took to bring the crisis to 
a successful end.

Ironically,  Thailand's  Prime Minister, Mr. Chuan  Leekpai,  has 
come  under domestic political criticism over certain aspects  of 
the  commando  operation  that  ended  the  hospital  seizure  at 
Ratchaburi  that  lies not far from the border with  Myanmar.  In 
contrast, the SPDC is basking in the sunshine of a success  story 
that  was,  in  some measure, made  possible  by  the  diplomatic 
pressure it exerted on Bangkok during the latest crisis.

There  is more to this contrast than meets the eye. The SPDC,  on 
one  side, and successive Governments in Thailand, on the  other, 
often tend to view differently even the issues of common  concern 
to them. This is traceable to the traditional  cultural-political 
rivalry  between the Thais and Myanmar's majority  population  of 
Burmese  and to Bangkok's more recent historical  experiences  of 
befriending  the  West,  especially  the  U.S.,  and  China,   on 
differing diplomatic wavelengths though.

Following the latest rescue of several hundred Thai hostages from 
what  turned  out  to  be the  loose  clutches  of  10  anti-SPDC 
militants, all belonging to Myanmar despite the fact that some of 
them did not wish to owe allegiance to that country, Yangon  lost 
no  time in commending the action taken by the Chuan  Government. 
An act of anti-State terrorism was defeated, it was acknowledged, 
and  in  this  case  the 10 gunmen  in  question  had  mounted  a 
challenge  primarily against Thailand even while actually  trying 
to gain a concession from Bangkok in their fight with Yangon.

The  Ratchaburi incident laid bare some aspects of a  slack  Thai 
security preparedness as also the desperation of the  anti-Yangon 
terrorists. On January 24, ten gunmen, all believed at that  time 
to  be  members of the so-called ``God's Army''  of  anti-Myanmar 
Karen  rebels, seized a large hospital complex at Ratchaburi  and 
took all the several hundred people hostage.The gunmen, who  were 
killed  by  an elite commando team of Thai  military  and  police 
personnel in a pre-dawn swoop on January 25, had asked Bangkok to  
stop  shelling the hilltop positions of the Karen  rebels  inside 
neigbouring  Myanmar. The genesis was that the Myanmarese  troops 
had launched a major offensive against those Karen posts about  a 
week  prior to the latest hostage drama, and  Bangkok's  military 
resorted to a barrage of warning fire to prevent the Karens  from 
using  Thailand as a base for tactical or actual  retreat.  Quite 
apart  from  normative  international law,  Mr.  Chuan's  current 
compulsions  were  determined by the need to befriend  Yangon,  a 
colleague in the Association of South East Asian Nations, in  the 
context  of  the SPDC's ire over Thailand's act of  organising  a 
``guided safe passage'' for the gunmen of the ``Vigorous  Burmese 
Student  Warriors''  as a reward for releasing  those  they  took 
hostage  in a seizure of the Myanmarese embassy in  Bangkok  last 
October.

Another key demand of the terrorists at Ratchaburi this time  was 
that the Karen fighters and civil war refugees should be  allowed 
free  access to Thailand for either medical treatment  or  indeed 
ordinary livelihood. The implicit audacity of the desperadoes  in 
making  these  demands was seen by Bangkok as an affront  to  its 
state  authority  and  the hospitality  which  it  had  generally 
extended   to  the  anti-Yangon  rebels  over  many   years   for 
``humanitarian'' reasons.

For  several years now, the Karen rebels have been waging a  low- 
intensity  ``insurgency''  against the SPDC,  after  having  lost 
their earlier momentum in January 1995.

Unresolved  by  this  week-end were suspicions  that  the  latest 
hostage  drama  might  have been enacted  entirely  by  the  pro-
democracy  ``Warriors'' who were given sanctuary by  the  ``God's 
Army'' in the wake of their embassy seizure last October. If that 
be   true,  Thailand  is  willing,  as  seen  from   the   SPDC's 
perspective, to avoid actions that could amount to Faustian deals 
with  terrorism in the perceived cause of democracy which is  the 
long-term ``goal'' of the Yangon regime itself.
