
Golan is their goal 


From the Syrian perspective, the recovery of the Golan Heights is 
the  issue, writes KESAVA MENON. If the price is the dropping  of 
an ideology-driven hostility to Israel, then so be it.

WHEN TALKS between Syria and Israel resumed in mid-February,  Mr. 
Farooq  al Sharaa, Syria's Foreign Minister, made an  impassioned 
speech  in  which  he said that the West had  not  paid  adequate 
attention to the suffering of the Arab peoples at Israel's hands. 
This  speech did not go down well with his Israeli  interlocutors 
nor reportedly with many U.S. officials. But the truth is evident 
also in the manner in which all sorts of considerations,  besides 
their  concern for their own people, are given  equal  importance 
while  assessments are made of the motives which led  the  Syrian 
Government to re-start talks with Israel. 

The  simple truth is that at least 1,50,000 Syrian citizens  were 
forced to leave the Golan Heights when it was captured by  Israel 
in 1967. They and their descendants, estimated as numbering  more 
than  4,00,000  now, have been trying to make a living  in  other 
parts of Syria thereby affecting the country as a whole.  Upwards 
of  another 1,50,000 Golan residents, mainly Druze,  continue  to 
live  on the Golan under Israeli occupation but have  refused  to 
relinquish  their loyalties to Syria. This despite the fact  that 
fellow  Druze  tribesmen who live in the hills that are  part  of 
Israel  have  long been loyal citizens of that country  and  have 
provided some of its best soldiers.

The  plight of the Golan Druze has been best encapsulated in  the 
stories  and photographs of divided families using megaphones  to 
talk  to each other because they cannot communicate in any  other 
way   across  the  ceasefire  lines.  They  also  have   numerous 
complaints  about land confiscations and other disabilities  they 
suffer under Israeli occupation.

From  the  Syrian perspective, the recovery of the Golan  is  the 
issue.  If  the price to be paid for that is the dropping  of  an 
ideology-driven hostility to Israel then so be it. Here again the 
Arab  perspective  is different from the western or  the  Israeli 
one.   The   Syrians  like  other  Arabs  believe   that   future 
demographics  will  work in their favour. Their  populations  are 
growing  at  a  faster rate than that of  Israel  and  the  Arabs 
therefore hope that there will come a time when the Jews will  be 
swamped.  There  could  be other developments  in  the  future  - 
cultural  assimilation  or secularisation  of  regional  politics 
across  the  spectrum  - which could lead to an  erosion  of  the 
concept  of a state for the Jews. These projections might not  be 
accurate (for instance, the fact that the population growth  rate 
among religious Jews is far higher than that of the secular  does 
not  appear  to have been adequately assessed) but the  Arabs  do 
recognise that the future need not be wholly captive to the past. 

Syria's  Government would also have calculated that not  all  the 
treaties  in  the world can make people forget  five  decades  of 
hostility.  The Egyptian and Israeli Governments made peace  well 
over a decade ago. Other than a deal which enables Egypt to  sell 
its  gas  to  Israel, and the sight of Israeli  tourists  at  the 
Pyramids  or  the Taba sea resort, there is very little  to  show 
that  the peoples of the two countries have kissed and  made  up. 
The signing of a peace deal might signify the recognition of  the 
fact  that  they  have  to live with  Israel  at  least  for  the 
immediate future. But it need not signify the abandonment of  the 
belief  that a ``State for the Jews'' is an abomination  in  West 
Asia. 

When  Syria's  President,  Mr. Hafez al Assad,  assented  to  the 
resumption  of talks with Israel he was confronted  with  certain 
hard  facts.  For one, Israel was moving quite  steadily  towards 
completing  the circle of peace, or at least a civil truce,  with 
its neighbours. Despite the war of rhetoric still going on it was 
reasonable  to expect that the U.S. President, Mr. Bill  Clinton, 
would  be able to get the Palestinians to make their  peace  with 
Israel  by  the  end of this year. That  would  leave  Syria  and 
Lebanon as the last hold-outs, to the irritation of a world  that 
has  become  weary of the Arab-Israeli conflict.  Open  hostility 
towards Israel had also become unsustainable with the rest of the 
Arab  world  realising that the policy of  confrontation  was  no 
longer  the  best  available option. An external  ally  like  the 
Soviet  Union no longer exists. Given the increasing  edge  which 
Israeli  is acquiring in the technological dimension of  warfare, 
unstinting  U.S.  support to it and the  burgeoning  relationship 
between  Tel Aviv and Ankara, the Syrian prospects in a  military 
confrontation  with  Israel are fast dwindling.  Then  again  the 
Syrian  economy  is in dire straits with  high  unemployment  and 
inflation  and there is little prospect of drawing foreign  funds 
or   even   re-directing  internal  resources  while   there   is 
uncertainty about peace on the borders. 

As  against  the  poor  returns  that  can  be  expected  from  a 
continuation  of  the  confrontationist  policy  were  the   real 
dividends  that  could be derived from a peace treaty.  The  last 
four  Israeli  Prime Ministers, including the present  one,  have 
strongly  hinted that they recognise the necessity of a  complete 
withdrawal from the Golan Heights if a comprehensive peace is  to 
be  established. They have also hinted strongly that  they  could 
contemplate  such a withdrawal if their concerns  are  satisfied. 
Mr.  Assad,  like everyone else, is well aware that  Mr.  Clinton 
sees a comprehensive West Asian peace as a major component of his 
legacy.  Mr. Clinton's Presidency does not have long to  run  and 
Mr. Assad's own health is not very robust either. Time for a deal 
is getting to be at a premium. 

Even after he restores the Golan to Syrian sovereignty, Mr. Assad 
might  face  the  hostility  of militant  Sunni  groups  who  are 
ideologically  committed  to  the destruction  of  Israel.  These 
groups  are small and have not much leeway in  tightly-controlled 
Syria  but  the  Sunnis are the biggest sectarian  group  in  the  
Syrian  populace. However, with the return of the Golan Druze  to 
his fold, Mr. Assad will have the support of another ethnic group 
which  along  with  his own Alawites forms the  backbone  of  the 
Syrian army.
