
Playing big brother? 


There is a marked lack of warmth towards South Africa on the part 
of most of its neighbours. M. S. PRABHAKARA looks at the possible 
reasons.

A  NOTABLE  feature  of  South  Africa's  relations  with   other 
countries is the marked lack of warmth towards it on the part  of 
most  of its neighbours. This, on the face of it,  is  surprising 
given that these were the frontline states which provided crucial 
material, diplomatic and military support to the struggle against 
apartheid; and in that process were themselves subjected to  open 
and covert aggression by the apartheid regime. The Report of  the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission presents detailed accounts of 
crimes committed by the apartheid regime against the  Governments 
and  people  of nine countries of the  southern  African  region: 
Angola,  Botswana,  Lesotho, Mozambique,  Swaziland,  Seychelles, 
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

This, however, is on the way to becoming a historical  curiosity. 
Since  the liberation movement became the party of government  in 
South Africa, things have become rather different. The legitimate 
admiration of the ``moral stature'' of the democratic  government 
in Pretoria is now mostly limited to distant admirers in the West 
and occasional visitors, some of whom seem to be caught in a time 
warp of the heady days of the installation of Mr. Nelson  Mandela 
as President. Countries closer home, however, have problems  with 
their big and powerful neighbour. An Indian observer cannot  help 
being  reminded, in this context, of the moral high  ground  that 
India  occupied in the early years of independence; and  equally, 
of  the  rapid  erosion  of that  stature  as  harsher  realities 
prevailed, especially since the mid-1960s.

The  starkest examples of the uneasy relationship  between  South 
Africa and some of its neighbours is the correlation of forces in 
the ongoing conflicts in Angola (25 years old) and the Democratic 
Republic  of the Congo (DRC). Angola, Namibia and  Zimbabwe  have 
sent troops in support of the Government of Mr. Laurent Kabila to 
defeat  what he claims is ``aggression'' by Rwanda and Uganda  in 
support  of malcontent rebel factions. In a related  development, 
Namibia  has  allowed Angola to conduct  operations  against  the 
Unita  rebels along its northern border. Both Angola and the  DRC 
have accused South Africa, which has been urging an ``inclusive'' 
settlement  in both the cases and has played host to the  rebels, 
of actively or covertly supporting the rebels.

Zimbabwe's  problems with South Africa are rather  more  complex, 
given the close historical links between the settler and colonial 
regimes  that  preceded  the dawn of  independence  in  both  the 
countries  and  the  many  common  factors  in  their  liberation 
struggles.  Both Angola and Zimbabwe were actual theatres of  war 
in  the armed struggle against the apartheid regime.  Though  the 
resentment against South Africa in Zimbabwe is, for now, grounded  
in issues of economy and commerce, Pretoria is also resented  for 
what is seen as its support to parties and groups opposed to  the 
ZANU-PF Government headed by Mr. Robert Mugabe. One should not be 
surprised  if  in  the not-too-distant  future,  leaders  of  the 
Government in Harare also accuse Pretoria of aiding ``rebels  and 
aggressors''.

What is the stand of South Africa in respect of the conflicts  in 
its neighbourhood, and indeed on the continent and in the rest of 
the  world?  The  question  is important  in  the  light  of  the 
initiatives  being taken by South Africa (Northern Ireland,  East 
Timor, Palestine, Lockerbie) of its own volition and in  response 
to  pleas  by  the ``international community''  as  mediator  and 
facilitator  in  conflict resolution, often accompanied  by  much 
media  hype.  The  assumption is that South  Africa  is  uniquely 
qualified  to  provide  solutions, given its  resolution  of  the 
seemingly  irresolvable conflict within the country. Things  are, 
however,  not so simple. Some of these have gone awry,  some  are 
proceeding apace or gurgling away under the influence of  factors 
outside such initiatives.

The recent accusations by Mr. Kabila that South Africa is  openly 
and  covertly  supporting  the rebels have to be  viewed  in  the 
context  of this unique role that has been both assigned to,  and 
assumed by, South Africa. This perception of South Africa on  the 
part of some of its neighbours is neither new nor unique.  Angola 
too has for long maintained that South Africa is aiding the rebel 
force, Unita. Indeed, in September last year, the Deputy  Foreign 
Minister of Angola called for ``international sanctions'' against 
South  Africa,  along  with Burkina  Faso,  Uganda,  Ukraine  and 
Zambia,  accusing  them  of  not  adhering  to  the  U.N.-imposed 
sanctions against Unita.

The realpolitick view of South Africa's foreign policy is that in 
essential  respects  it is marked by continuity  rather  than  by 
change.  In  this view, given the size and economic  strength  of 
South  Africa, and its arrogant sense of destiny as  the  leading 
power  of  the continent, such continuity in the pursuit  of  its 
``national   interests''  is  entirely  natural.  The   permanent 
interests of nation-states do not change merely because there has 
been a change in government - even of so radical and  fundamental 
a  kind  as took place in South Africa in  1994.  South  Africa's 
sense  of  destiny  on the continent is  indeed  strong,  and  is 
articulated  in  terms  of an historical and  a  suffused  poetic 
vision  as  an ideology and theory of  the  African  renaissance, 
driven  naturally  by it. Rather more  tellingly,  this  historic 
destiny  is also articulated in the gloating  (and  corresponding 
moaning)  over  every  victory (and defeat)  in  the  competitive 
sports.

This would be, however, a superficial and perhaps even a  cynical 
view, though one should also note that the now no more new  South 
Africa  has absorbed and made its own many of the  most  detested 
symbols and even the substance of the apartheid regime - the most 
obvious  being  those  abominations of the  old  regime  such  as  
Parliament and the judicial system.

The problem lies deeper. Fundamental to South Africa's perception 
as  a  nation-state, inasmuch as it was to the  apartheid  regime 
too, is its perceived exceptionalism - both in its history and in 
its  destiny. Thus, the process and the components of  what  many 
foreigners  still  characterise as the South  African  miracle  - 
negotiations  and  an inclusive political settlement -  have  now 
assumed  the status of a universal panacea for every conflict  in 
the  region, on the continent, anywhere. Indeed, insofar  as  the 
South  African prescriptive view of the world is  concerned,  now 
that  it  has  attained  its miracle, the  era  of  conflicts  is 
definitely  over  -  this notwithstanding  the  evidence  to  the 
contrary.  This  too  is  of a piece  with  the  curious  mix  of 
innocence  and moral arrogance that characterised the conduct  of 
Indian foreign policy in the early years of independence.
