
The peace is broken 


After  14  months of peace, the Basque  separatists  have  struck 
again  in  Spain.  And, reports VAIJU NARAVANE,  the  people  are 
angry.

LAST SUNDAY, central Madrid was black with people. It was a grim, 
silent procession, at once sorrowful and angry, a million strong, 
moving  slowly  from the Plaza Colon to the Puerta del  Sol.  The 
silence said it all. ``Basta ya''. That's enough. Enough spilling 
of innocent blood.

Madrid  had not seen such an overwhelming show of popular  anger, 
bitterness, frustration and indignation since the  demonstrations 
against  the killing of a young municipal officer,  Miguel  Angel 
Blanco,  in  July  1997. Last Sunday,  the  Spanish  capital  was 
protesting  the  assassination of Lt. Col  Pedro  Antonio  Blanco 
Garcia,  the 47-year-old father of two who was blown up in a  car 
bomb explosion on January 23.

Breaking  its  14-month-old, self-imposed ceasefire,  Euzkadi  Ta 
Azkatasuna (ETA), the Basque separatist organisation, had  struck 
again.

The  Prime  Minister,  Mr.  Jose Maria  Aznar,  and  Mr.  Joachin 
Almunia,  his  Socialist  political rival  in  the  parliamentary 
elections  scheduled for March 12, marched behind a  huge  banner 
proclaiming  ``For peace and liberty. Terrorism, no!'' By  common 
consent the two men had decided to set aside their differences to 
denounce terrorism. At their side were politicians of every  hue, 
trade unionists, prominent artists and writers. It was as if  all 
of  Spain  had agreed to make common cause against  violence,  to 
protect their young democracy and Constitution.

In the Basque country, however, there were both pro and  anti-ETA 
demonstrations.  In Pamplona, for example,  10,000  demonstrators 
called  for the release of ETA prisoners. And the leaders of  the 
two  radical  nationalist  parties, Herri  Batasuna  (HB  or  the 
political wing of the ETA) and Euskal Herritarok (EH), maintained 
a sullen silence when asked to condemn the killing.

With  legislative  elections just six weeks  away  the  political 
climate has suddenly become tense with accusations flying in  all 
directions.  Spain has been holding its breath, waiting  for  the 
ETA to strike ever since the separatist organisation announced it 
was ending its unilateral ceasefire as of December 3. Mr. Aznar's 
right wing Popular Party as well as his coalition Government have 
come in for some strong criticism. Mr. Aznar's party has  accused 
one of its supporters, the moderate Basque PNV party which  heads 
the regional government in the Basque country, of tolerating pro-
ETA radicals. 

In  the  Basque province of Navarre, the Interior  Minister,  Mr.  
Jaime  Mayor Oreja, turned on Mr. Xabier Arzalluz, who leads  the 
PNV,  growling:  ``How many more deaths will it take for  you  to 
snap  ties with the radical separatists (EH, HB)?'' Mr.  Arzalluz 
snarled  back:  ``And how many more deaths will it take  for  the 
Government to finally act?''

The  ETA made its ceasefire announcement on September  16,  1998, 
partly  because  it was exhausted and needed to buy time  to  re-
group  and  partly  because  it felt  it  could  wrest  political 
concessions  from  Mr.  Aznar's Government  for  a  ``nationalist 
Basque project''. But only one of the planned meetings took place 
between  the Government and the ETA, last May in Zurich,  and  it 
ended in failure.

Terrorist  violence  and the Government's  obvious  inability  to 
forge  a way forward could seriously damage the  Popular  Party's 
electoral chances. Ironically, Mr. Aznar was utterly confident of 
a win when he announced the election date on January 17. The  ETA 
gave him just four days to feel smug before striking hard, in the 
centre of Madrid.

The  unresolved Basque question is bound to create  problems  for 
Mr. Aznar. His Government has been utterly inflexible in  dealing 
with nationalists and radicals. After the Zurich meeting  between 
the  Government  and the ETA failed last May,  Mr.  Josep  Piqui, 
Government  spokesman, said: ``The only answer the Spanish  State 
will   give  ETA  is  to  stop  the  bombings  and   arrest   the 
perpetrators.  ETA  must understand that it will not  attain  its 
objectives through violence.''

The  Basque nationalist coalition Government in the three  Basque 
provinces led by the PNV (moderate nationalist) is going to  have 
to make some difficult choices. Mr. Juan Jose Ibarretxe who heads 
the  Basque  autonomous  Government  has  already  announced  the 
``suspension''  of  agreements  signed between the  PNV  and  the 
radical  HB-EH formation last May. The political wing of the  ETA 
has still to make an unequivocal condemnation of the blast  which 
killed  Lt. Col. Garcia ten days ago. Its failure to do so  could 
threaten  the survival of the coalition and could  reshuffle  the 
balance of political power in the Basque region.

In  the meanwhile, residents of Bilbao, San Sebastian  and  other 
major  Basque  towns  are expressing anger  at  the  Government's 
failure  to  seize  the  opportunity  offered  by  the   14-month 
ceasefire,  the longest in the history of the 35-year-old  Basque 
separatist struggle. ``I had forgotten what fear felt like - that 
split second's hesitation before entering a cafi of a bus station 
which had become second nature to me,'' said Mr. Miguel Santiago, 
a teacher.

During   the   14-month  ceasefire,  the  Basque   country   made 
significant  economic  gains,  especially in  tourism.  Now  tour 
groups  are  cancelling  hotel bookings  and  bankers  fear  that 
capital which had begun to creep back into the province will once 
again  flee. ``The fear is palpable, tangible. You could  cut  it  
with  a knife. When my sons go to school each morning I see  them 
leave  with a knot of fear in my stomach...'' Maria, wife  of  a 
senior official, trails off.

But  increasingly  the  population  is  showing  its  anger   and 
indignation,  even in the Basque country. Says Mr.  Xabier  Elso, 
sociologist: ``In fact nothing has changed. The fissure  dividing 
Basque  `nationalists'  and  `non-nationalists'  has  grown  even 
wider.  Until  Herri  Batasuna, political wing of  the  ETA  rids 
itself of the terrorists' stranglehold, nothing will change.''
