
Water... fire and brimstone 


The self-appointed guardians of morality and culture have decided 
that Ms. Deepa Mehta must be opposed. NEENA VYAS on the  troubles 
the filmmaker is facing in shooting ``Water''.

OVER  THE  years,  the  RSS  and  its  offshoots,  including  its 
political  arm,  the Bharatiya Janata Party,  have  arrogated  to 
themselves  the  right  to  determine  what  constitutes   Indian 
culture,  and more importantly, what offends the Indian  cultural 
ethos  and  should therefore be opposed,  demolished,  burnt  and 
thrown out.

Hindutva   was  defined  by  Mr.  L.  K.  Advani  as   ``cultural 
nationalism'', giving an indication of the importance of culture, 
or  rather culture as the RSS chooses to define it. Although  Mr. 
Advani  and  RSS  leaders have often talked  about  the  ``Indian 
culture that is essentially Hindu'' because of the  predomination 
of Hindus in the population of this country, in practise the  RSS 
and  the BJP have been intolerant of the non-Hindu  streams  that 
make up Indian culture and have very little understanding of what 
culture, Indian or any other, is all about.

If  this  were not the case, would the BJP have approved  of  the 
Vishwa Hindu Parishad plan to raze to the ground the Babri Masjid 
which was perhaps the only known monument going back to the  days 
of the first Mughal Emperor? 

Would the RSS have opposed M. F. Husain's depiction of  Saraswati 
and  even  threatened to burn his paintings when the  temples  of 
Puri,  Khajuraho,  the Gomateshwar and the  Ajanta  frescoes  are 
testimony to the fact that nudity and eroticism were very much  a 
part of Indian cultural history? In fact, it would seem that  our 
RSS guardians of culture are more influenced by Christianity  and 
its emphasis on virginity.

Emboldened by a BJP-led Government at the Centre, RSS  affiliates 
have increasingly taken upon themselves the task of ``cleansing'' 
the  Indian  cultural  scene  of whatever  they  think  does  not 
represent ``true Indian culture''. When Ms. Deepa Mehta dared  to 
explore the theme of love between two women, it immediately  drew 
the  ire  of  RSS  and  the Shiv  Sena.  Both  had  arrogated  to 
themselves the job of guardians of public morality. 

The  theatres where her first film to be set in India,  ``Fire'', 
was shown about two years ago were attacked in Mumbai and  Delhi, 
virtually  forcing cinema hall owners to stop the screening.  And 
now,  when she plans to shoot another film, ``Water'', the  self-
appointed guardians of morality and culture have decided that Ms. 
Mehta is a bad one, and must be opposed.

Ms.  Mehta's problems began when she landed in  Varanasi  earlier 
this  month  all  set to begin the shooting  of  ``Water''  after  
getting the necessary clearances from the authorities  concerned. 
But suddenly, the district authorities denied her permission  and 
also  added that they could not ensure the safety of her  crew  - 
apparently at the behest of two Uttar Pradesh Ministers who  felt 
she was too controversial. 

This  coincided nicely with the protests against the film by  RSS 
affiliates  in  Varanasi,  making  it  clear  that  the  BJP  was 
agreeable to playing duet with the RSS on this subject. All  this 
naturally upset Ms. Mehta's plans for a 45-day shooting  schedule 
taking  her  through  the last few days of  January  and  through 
February.

After  some  desperate  efforts,  Ms. Mehta  managed  to  get  an 
assurance  from the Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary,  Mr.  Yogendra 
Narain,  who  has now reportedly directed the  Varanasi  district 
authorities  to provide Ms. Mehta's team full security and  allow 
her to proceed with the shooting of the film.

But  the  problem may have only begun, as  indicated  by  Sanskar 
Bharati, an offspring of the RSS, which is not going to be guided 
by the district authorities. The plan seems to be to ``organise'' 
so-called  public protests. Law and order could then provide  the 
district authorities with the excuse to clamp down once again  on 
Ms. Mehta.

Sanskar  Bharati has already geared up its machinery in  Varanasi 
where Ms. Mehta's crew is shooting the new film. Even before  the 
first  shot for the new film was taken, the organisation  decided 
that Ms. Mehta must be opposed.

The  reasons given were specious. An RSS pracharak,  Mr.  Chandra 
Mohan, when contacted in Varanasi, said that ``the sacred  Ganges 
cannot  be simply described as water''. His allegation  was  that 
Ms. Mehta was up to no good, and that her film would dwell on the 
dirt  and  squalor  of Kashi, on the pitiable  condition  of  the 
widows who eke out their lives around the ghats, and that  ``this 
hurts  our religious sentiments for Varanasi is the holiest  city 
for Hindus''.

A top functionary in Sanskar Bharati based in Agra identified  as 
``Bankeyji'' said reports had come that Ms. Mehta's script dwells 
on  the  condition of ``the widows from Bengal''  and  that  ``we 
would  not  have protested if she had chosen to  show  a  rounded 
picture  of  what Varanasi is and what it means to  Hindus''.  He 
pointed  out  that the organisation did not yet have  any  formal 
action plan to protest against the shooting, but ``yes, not  only 
Sanskar Bharati but many other organisations will join in if  she 
persists''.

The  secretary of Sanskar Bharati in Varanasi, Mr.  Pramod,  said 
that  to begin with they would sit on dharna wherever  Ms.  Mehta 
went to shoot her film. And he added that the main objection  was 
to   the   film  depicting  young  widows   being   forced   into 
prostitution. 

Apparently,  Sanskar  Bharati is now trying  to  encourage  ``the 
people''  to  oppose  Ms. Mehta's venture. ``We plan  to  set  up 
another  front called the `Kashi Sanskriti Raksha  Manch',''  Mr. 
Jitendra,  an  office-bearer of the  Sanskar  Bharati's  Varanasi 
unit,  told  TheHindu.He  said that ``it is the  people  who  are 
opposed to her film. And if the people protest, certainly several 
organisations  including the Sanskar Bharati would join  them  to 
oppose and prevent the shooting of `Water''.

The idea apparently is that the RSS or its affiliates should  not 
be   singled  out  as  the  culprits  to  save   the   Government 
embarrassment, for no doubt that with the success of two films to 
her  credit Ms. Mehta has become a celebrity. The  Government  is 
expected to try and keep its hands clean, but no doubt the RSS is 
planning to fan a ``public agitation'' against Ms. Mehta and  her 
crew.

The methods employed are always the same. It was the anger of  80 
per cent Hindus in this country which demolished the Babri Masjid 
in Ayodhya, it was the ``people'' who expressed their  resentment 
against  Husain for daring to offend their religious  sentiments, 
it was the ``people'' who were horrified by Ms. Mehta's ``Fire'', 
and now again it is the ``people'' who apprehend she will  offend 
their sensibilities with her new venture, ``Water''.
