
'The Govt. is to blame' 


BOTH  THE separatist and the mainstream Opposition are  unanimous 
in blaming the Governments at the Centre and in the State for the 
present state of affairs in Jammu and Kashmir. 

The People's Democratic Party (PDP) firebrand and former MLA, Ms. 
Mehbooba Mufti, says the political process which emerged in  1996 
has  failed to deliver the goods. There is total  disillusionment 
among  the  people vis-a-vis the National  Conference  Government 
which is seen as having failed to protect them and restore  their 
honour and dignity.

``There  is  pressure  on  the  State  Government  to  show  that 
everything   is  normal  and  for  that  the  people  are   being 
suppressed,''   says   Ms.  Mehbooba,  who  resigned   from   the 
Congress(I) to join the PDP headed by her father, Mufti  Mohammad 
Sayeed. 

There  is no human touch, she adds. Ms. Mehbooba reiterated  that 
there  should a dialogue with the disgruntled sections, i.e.  the 
militants.  But  there is hardly any effort from  the  Centre  to 
address  the real issues and to listen to the voice  of  dissent, 
she says.

The  senior  Hurriyat  leader, Mr. Abdul Gani  Lone,  blames  the 
Government  of India. He says Kashmiri youth were killed but  the 
real  issue  - ``the right of self-determination''  -  was  never 
addressed.  Mr. Lone argues that there is a political  vacuum  as 
the Hurriyat leadership is behind bars.

He says Kashmir has three parties and there should be  tripartite 
talks to resolve the issue. On foreign militants, he says  ``they 
do  not  believe in borders''. Let the Centre resolve  the  issue 
politically and everything will be over, he asserts. 

The  CPI(M)  State  secretary,  Mr.  Mohammad  Yousuf   Tarigami, 
declares  that  the ``whole governance  is  disappointing''.  The 
increase  in  militancy  is not only  because  of  Pakistan;  the 
Centre's attitude is also responsible, he says. It is the  result 
of the Pokhran adventurism, he says. 

``Alienation is increasing and there is no effort to arrest  that 
trend,'' he says.

The  NC Government has failed to live up to the  expectations  of 
the  people, he says pointing out that the entire  administration 
is  paralysed by the employees' strike but the  State  Government 
appears unmoved. 

- S. B.
