
Darkness over the Valley 


Everything  lies  shattered  in Kashmir.  Peace,  prosperity  and 
development, promised on the return of democratic rule in October 
1996,  remain a dream. SHUJAAT BUKHARI details the plight of  the 
people.

EVERTHING  LIES  shattered  in  Kashmir.  Peace,  prosperity  and 
development, promised on the return of democratic rule in October 
1996,  remain a dream. Militancy continues unabated. And, all  of 
Kashmir is literally groping in the dark, with only two hours  of 
power  supply  a  day.  Besides,  the  nearly  three  lakh  State 
employees have been on strike since December 20, 1999. As the new 
millennium  begins, this is what the people have been  ``gifted'' 
by the Governments at the Centre and in the State. 

The  widespread  view is that the situation in the State  now  is 
worse  than that prevailing in the early Nineties when the  crack 
of Kalashnikovs was first heard. But, the authorities claim  they 
can  contain  what  they call the  ``frustrated  moves''  by  the 
militants. But, a political solution remains elusive and no party 
to the crisis seems inclined to move in a positive direction.

Why  this  spurt in militancy, pushing into  the  background  the 
political  set-up whether pro or anti national? The  reasons  are 
many, not just the ruling elite's favourite refrain: Pakistan  is 
abetting  militancy.  There is a lack of will  in  the  political 
system;  the rulers whether in New Delhi or Srinagar are seen  as 
having  taken  the  people  for  a  ride  and  this  has  led  to 
restlessness.  Earlier caught in the crossfire of  militants  and 
security  forces,  the hapless Kashmiris are now witness  to  the 
exchange  of  allegations  and  counter-allegations  between  Dr. 
Farooq Abdullah's National Conference regime and the Centre. 

The NC accuses the Centre of not being wholehearted in supporting 
the  State financially and of punishing it for the wrongs of  the 
seven-year-long  gubernatorial  regime.  The  NC  says  that  the 
compensation packages announced for Punjab and the Northeast from 
time  to  time smack of different yardsticks being  used.  Sheikh 
Mustafa  Kamal, State Industries Minister and younger brother  of 
the Chief Minister, minces no words in accusing a section of  the 
bureaucracy  in  New Delhi of pushing Jammu and  Kashmir  to  the 
wall. ``The Kashmir affairs department in Delhi has turned into a 
department of intrigues against the State,'' he alleges.

The Centre, on its part, stresses the need for accountability  in 
the  State  adiministration. For, the State Government  has  been 
facing a storm of allegations. The main charge is that it has not 
been  able  to deliver the goods. The NC regime  claims  to  have 
broken  the political stalemate and given the people a  sense  of 
relief  at  all levels. But this is not reflected at  the  ground 
level. Most people do not see their honour and dignity as  having 
been  restored.  In  fact, the general feeling  is  that  the  NC  
Government   had   developed  a  contemptous   attitude   towards 
Kashmiris,  notwithstanding  the fact that after seven  years  of 
death and destruction, they again embraced the party in 1996 with 
the  hope  that the much-talked-about  ``Kashmiriat''  was  still 
alive in it, though its leaders took refuge outside the Valley in 
the bad days. 

The  NC  leaders claim credit for providing jobs to  over  45,000 
youth,  streamlining the administration,  reconstructing  bridges 
and schools and above all the promise to restore greater autonomy 
to the State. But, on the ground, the results are yet to be seen. 
Challenges to the NC regime are increasing with each passing day, 
the  latest  being  the total breakdown in power  supply  to  the 
Valley  as a result of two bomb blasts at transmission towers  at 
Uri and Qazigund. At the Chief Minister's instance, an  emergency 
restoration  system (ERS) was rushed from Delhi in eight  special 
flights.  But the fact remains that otherwise also most parts  of 
rural  Kashmir are facing acute shortage of power.  According  to 
one  assessment,  over 250 transformers are out of order  in  the 
Valley and for lack of funds these cannot be set right. 

The  same is the case with other civic problems, though a  senior 
Minister  says ``One should appreciate the role of the NC as  the 
situation  is  not conducive with Pakistan  continuing  with  its 
proxy war.''

The  entire  administration  is  paralysed  with  all  Government 
offices near-empty for more than a month now. Its employees  have 
locked  horns  with  the State Government  over  the  release  of 
dearness   allowance  instalments  and  implementation  of   more 
recommendations  of the Fifth Pay Commission. Talks  have  failed 
and the State has invoked the Essential Services Maintenance  Act 
(ESMA) to deal with the striking employees. The State is  reeling 
under a severe financial crisis and is not in a position to  bear 
the Rs. 400 crores need to pay DA etc. 

The Centre, it is alleged, is sticking to its game of putting the 
Farooq Government on the defensive. Though, the NC is part of the 
National Democratic Alliance, the BJP has joined other Opposition 
parties in supporting the employees against the State Government. 

In  the absence of a serious effort on the political  front,  the 
militancy has assumed dangerous proportions. The recent  addition 
is  the fidayeen culture which so far has maintained its pace  to 
inflict  losses on security forces with little effort  and  fewer 
casualties  on the militants side. Even as the home-grown  Hizbul 
Mujahideen  are  still in operation, the  pan-Islamic  Harkat-ul-
Mujahideen and Lashkar-e-Taiba have been calling the shots. Since 
July  last, the militants have adopted a new pattern of  sneaking 
directly  into  camps of the security forces. Starting  with  the 
attack on the BSF headquarters at Bandipore, they have  inflicted 
heavy  losses  - at the Badamibagh Cantonment where  the  Defence 
PRO, Major P. Purushottam, was killed alongwith seven others,  at 
the  Special Operations Group office at Khanabal and  the  latest 
being at Tatoo Ground.  

The release of three top militants - Masood Azhar, Mushtaq Zargar 
and  Ahmed Omar Sheikh - in exchange for the passengers and  crew 
of  the  hijacked  Indian  Airlines  flight  has  emboldened  the 
militant ranks, admit security authorities. Though there has been 
an  increase in militant activities, putting the security  forces 
on  tenterhooks,  so  far  there have  not  been  the  scenes  of 
jubilation among the people as was seen after the release of five 
top JKLF leaders in exchange for Rubaiya Sayeed in 1989. 

The latest militancy phase is sending shivers down the spines  of 
the people and the politicians, even as security officials assert 
that the situation is well under control and that ``it should not 
lead  to  any  kind of worry at  all''.  Mainstream  politicians, 
including NC men who have been the main target of militants, have 
chosen  to  lie  low; even separatist  politicians  concede  that 
militancy   has  taken  centre  stage  relegating  them  to   the 
background.  The All-Party Hurriyat Conference (APHC), even  with 
its  entire  leadership behind bars, has been managing  to  issue 
press statements.
