
Amendment versus re-evaluation 


By Mukund Padmanabhan

Much  of the criticism of the Government's proposal to set  up  a 
Constitution  Commission is based on the drawing up of  a  wholly 
artificial distinction - between a review and an amendment. Since 
any constitutional change is made via amendments, positions  like 
that staked out by the Congress - ``we are not against amendments 
but strongly opposed to reviews'' - make no legal sense at all.

Drawing  the  distinction along informal lines  (for  example,  a 
review  is  a  re-evaluation  of  the  Constitution,  whereas  an 
amendment is limited in scope) does not work either. How does one 
view the 42nd Amendment then, that infamous piece of  legislation 
sired  by  the  Congress Government which impacted  on  the  very 
foundation  of  the  Constitution? The  omnibus  Amendment  which 
altered  various  Articles of the Constitution was,  among  other 
things,  cynically directed at strengthening the legislature  and 
the cost of the judiciary by circumscribing the scope of judicial 
review  and  rendering the privileges of the  legislature  immune 
from judicial audit.

Two  subsequent amendments and some judicial  pronouncements  may 
have  repaired much of the damage done by the  wide-ranging  42nd 
Amendment.  But the last 50 years are littered with  examples  of 
how  the  dignity  of  the Constitution has  been  sought  to  be 
undermined by piecemeal amendments.

The Congress has found it expedient to hail the President, Mr. K. 
R.  Narayanan's ``wise words'' opposing a  constitutional  review 
and asserted that the Constitution has stood the test of scrutiny 
and  time.  But  the  sorry truth is  that  no  other  party  has 
contributed as much to the ad hoc alteration of the  Constitution 
when  in  power.  One amendment (39th),  which  was  subsequently 
struck down by the Supreme Court on the ground that it  militates 
against the principle of free and fair election, seemed as if  it 
was  directed  for  the  sole purpose  of  protecting  the  Prime 
Minister from being challenged in connection with her election to 
Parliament.

Ironically, it was the Congress which shored up the legislature's 
powers  to make any amendments to the Constitution it wished  to. 
This  was  done by the introduction of the  Constitution  (Twenty 
Fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, which altered Article 368 through  a 
series  of changes and additions. The amendment was  specifically 
directed at overturning the Supreme Court's judgment in the Golak 
Nath  v. State of Punjab case, in which the Bench ruled  that  no 
constitutional  amendment can abridge or take away a  fundamental 
right.  The  amendment also stripped Presidential  discretion  by 
making it obligatory for Rashtrapati Bhavan to give its assent to 
any Bill amending the Constitution. It also made it explicit that 
there are no limits on Parliament to amend the Constitution  ``by  
way of addition, variation or repeal''. While the courts did  not 
strike  down  the  Amendment, the  judgment  in  the  Kesavananda 
Bharati  case suggested that the power to amend stopped with  the 
``basic   structure''  of  the  Constitution.  Against   such   a 
background,  it  is odd that the setting up of  a  commission  to 
review the working of the Constitution has become the subject  of 
such  political  heat.  But  while  political  hypocrisy  is  not 
unexpected,  it is certainly both strange and surprising to  find 
Mr. Narayanan, speaking his mind on this issue.

The President's intervention, to say the least, was  ill-advised. 
To have expressed views which - either directly or tangentially - 
contradict  the  stated  objective of his own  Government  is  an 
extraordinarily  unusual practice for a Head of  State.  Whatever 
the  merit  of  his  views - and  Mr.  Narayanan's  opinions  are 
generally   worth  taking  note  of  -  there  seems  to  be   no 
justification for expressing them in public and in a manner which 
would suggest the existence of a divide between the President and 
his Government.

Moreover,  the  remarks have only served to raise  the  political 
temperature  over  a  controversy that has, for  the  most  part, 
generated  more heat than light. Mr. Vajpayee's  Government  must 
demonstrate  that the Constitution Commission is set up  in  good 
faith and does not become a vehicle for partisan ends.

But as some legal experts have averred, it is better to have  the 
enactment  of  a  comprehensive amendment  act  rather  than  the 
endless  piecemeal  amendments  that the  Constitution  has  been 
subject  to.  The  real issue is not about the setting  up  of  a 
Commission  but  the  manner in which it  works.  Until  we  know 
something  about its recommendations - which in any case have  to 
undergo  the same constitutional procedure for making  amendments 
if accepted - it is both premature and futile to make the issue a 
bone of political contention.

(Concluded)
