
Motorcycles ride two-wheeler boom 


By Ramnath Subbu

MUMBAI, JAN. 29. The two-wheeler market is in the midst of hectic 
activity and while players are slugging it out for a larger piece 
of the pie, new and innovative models are the order of the day. 

The  motorcycle segment has been singularly responsible  for  the 
hyperactivity in the industry. Constituting more than 45 per cent 
of  the total two-wheeler sector in terms of sales, this  segment 
has been growing at 25 per cent annually. 

The  scooter  segment in contrast has witnessed  sluggish  growth 
because   of  the  marked  shift  in  consumer   preference   for 
motorcycles.

At the same time, manufacturers are gearing up to meet  stringent 
Y2K  emission  norms which come into effect from  April  2000  in 
Delhi. 

To  conform, companies are required to go in for 4-stroke  models 
or to fit catalytic convertors.

Motorcycles  are categorised into power, economy and  combination 
segments.  The economy segment caters to the rural segment  while 
the  combination  segment is mainly urban and  the  largest.  The 
power segment constitutes the higher end of the market. 

According  to  Mr.  V. M. Wabgaonkar,  DGM,  Marketing,  Kinetic, 
``There is the factor of lifestyle change, Indian road conditions 
and  the  rural boom with consecutive good  monsoons.  The  rural 
market  is  booming with lower pricing in  the  economy  segment. 
Today the market is dominated by feature sensitive buyers.''

According  to Mr. Taher Badshah, senior analyst, Motilal Oswal  - 
Inquire,  an equity research outfit, ``The motorcycle  market  is 
neither saturated nor penetrated. 

Scooters  have  experienced a sluggish 2-3 per cent  growth.  The 
motorcycle is viewed more as a `workhorse' in rural areas.''

The  entry  barriers  to  new  players  are  established  brands, 
distribution network, business economics and components suppliers 
which have to be in place. Besides, import content which is  high 
for new ventures takes time to be localised.

Mr.  Atul  Sobti,  Senior VP, marketing  and  sales,  Hero  Honda 
Motors,  said,  ``There  has  been a  continuous  demand  in  the 
motorcycle  segment even during the recession. The  segment  will 
definitely  grow  at  more  than 15  per  cent  annually  in  the 
future.''

A  look  at the aggressive plans of industry majors.  Bajaj  Auto 
derives  more  than  60 per cent of its  two-wheeler  sales  from 
scooters. 

A  number of the company's products will have to be  fitted  with 
cat  convertors. Taking this into consideration, it has over  the 
last  year, launched the 110 cc 4-stroke motorcycle  Caliber  and 
the 4-stroke scooter Legend. In the current year, the company has 
lined up a whole range of products for launch. 

These include the 175 cc Eliminator and two scooters. The company 
is  now considering hiving off the motorcycle plant into a  joint 
venture with its partner - Kawasaki.

Hero  Honda  sold more motorcycles during the nine  months  ended 
December  31,  1999 than in the entire previous year  (5.36  lakh 
units against 5.30 lakh units in 1998). 

It  has  the strongest brand equity in  the  4-stroke  motorcycle 
segment.  It  is opening up dealerships in rural  and  semi-urban 
areas to cater to that market. 

LML is entering the motorbike segment through five models in  the 
100 to 150 cc four-stroke category beginning March - three in the 
100  cc category in mid-2000 and 150 cc four-stroke  scooters  in 
the first quarter of 2001. 

A  100  cc, four-stroke step through called Zeta is also  on  the 
anvil.  Capacity is also being increased from four lakh units  to 
7.2  lakh  units per annum with fresh capacity  in  the  4-stroke 
segment. 

LML  has  invested  Rs. 350 crores over two years  and  plans  to 
invest another Rs. 120 crores over the next 18 months.

The  motorbikes  are  being manufactured  in  collaboration  with 
Daelim,  South  Korea. More two-wheeler products  are  undergoing 
market research and may be launched in 2002.

Kinetic  is  entering  the motorcycle market  with  the  4-stroke 
Challenger.  Foraying into the power segment it is  to  introduce 
bikes  in  the 175 cc and 250 cc categories over the  next  12-18 
months. 

It  has tied up with Hyosung, Korea, for the GF series -  the  GF 
125 is to roll out in the second quarter of the 2000 calendar and 
the  GF  150  six  months thereafter.  The  company  has  already 
invested Rs. 80 crores in the Rs. 100 crore facility near Pune. 

TVS  Suzuki, the largest player in the mopeds segment with  a  50 
per cent plus market share, has 20 per cent share in motorcycles. 

The  4-stroke scooter Spectra failed to pick up but TVS  launched 
its  4-stroke  motorcycle - the Fiero, and plans  to  switch  its 
entire product range to four-stroke engines by 2003.  

For  1999-2000, the company has targeted a turnover of Rs.  1,650 
crores and a net profit of Rs. 120 crores. 
