
Davenport ends Hingis' three-year domination


By Nirmal Shekar

MELBOURNE,  JAN. 29. The teenager's lease was over. In fact,  the 
new  lessee  came  in  armed with  all  the  appropriate  papers, 
establishing her rights to the property. 

But Martina Hingis just wouldn't budge. Instead, driven almost to 
the gate, she suddenly tried to over-turn the new lease in  court 
-  forgive the pun - before Lindsay Davenport finally forced  the 
young  one out to take her rightful place in the Rod Laver  Arena 
this afternoon. 

Down  1-5,  1-5 and 15-30 on her  big-serving  opponent's  serve, 
Hingis,  champion  three  times  in a row  and  unbeaten  in  the 
Australian  Open  since 1996, staged a remarkable  comeback  that 
fell  short  of  the  miraculous as  Davenport  stamped  out  the 
teenager's  attempt to resurrect herself just in time for a  6-1, 
7-5 victory in the women's singles final. 

It  was  the second seeded Davenport's third  Grand  Slam  title, 
following  victories  in  the 1998 U.S. Open  and  last  summer's 
Wimbledon  championship  and  it came with  her  fourth  straight 
defeat  of her arch-rival. The big-built American has won  10  of 
their  17 matches and Hingis has not beaten Davenport  since  the 
1998 Chase championships. 

``I've  got  three different ones. Just one more to  win,''  said 
Davenport who is yet to win the French Open. ``You really got  to 
keep your lead against Martina. She is a fighter. I knew it would 
be  tough to put it away against her. But I am glad I  came  back 
strongly at 5-5,'' said the new champion who won $(Aus) 717,000. 

For  Hingis, who has always called the Rod Laver Arena her  home, 
it was a huge disappointment that she couldn't stretch her run of 
successes  here. But she accepted the inevitable  gracefully  and 
said,  ``I  got beaten by a great champion. It wasn't my  day.  I 
kept  looking at the time on the court. I wanted to make  it  one 
hour at least.'' 

In the end, as a Hingis backhand sailed over the baseline in  the 
12th game of the second set, an hour and five minutes had  ticked 
by.  But, it could have been as brief as 45 minutes. For that  is 
all  it  took  for Davenport, playing  near-  flawless  attacking 
tennis,  to run up a 5-1, 5-1 and 30-15 lead to come  within  two 
points  of  closing  out what might have been  one  of  the  most 
lopsided finals in the tournament history. 

The  last time a finalist had failed to win more than  two  games 
was  in 1994 when Steffi Graf outplayed Arantxa Sanchez-  Vicario 
6-0,  6-2.  And to think that Hingis had not lost a  set  in  her 
three previous finals here!  

``It was going so well. I made it look so easy. You don't get  to 
play  this  well in a Grand Slam final always. When you  do,  you 
have to relish it,'' said Davenport. ``But I definitely tensed up 
a bit when I first served for the match.'' 

For a good part of the match, Hingis looked like a  middle-weight 
boxer  who had stumbled into the wrong ring with a  hard  hitting 
heavyweight flaunting a rather nasty left hook. Hitting the  ball 
as  well as she has ever done, Davenport simply  overwhelmed  the 
Swiss teenager. 

Hingis won her first service game of the match and then the  next 
game she won was the second of the second set, also on serve.  It 
was  an  awesome exhibition of attacking tennis  from  Davenport, 
something that is rarely seen in the women's game in a Grand Slam 
final. 

Standing  inside the baseline, Davenport made a meal  of  Hingis' 
serves,  especially  the  second delivery,  and  left  her  young 
opponent  stranded  in the corners of the  court  with  powerful, 
deeply angled drives on both flanks. 

``Nobody takes so much risks like she does,'' said Hingis.  ``She 
just  goes  for her shots all the time. It's tough  to  play  her 
mentally.  One day it is going to be my day - I have to beat  her 
again,'' she said. 

The  first set was over in 19 minutes and it took Davenport  just 
16  minutes  to win six straight games from 0-1. In  the  second, 
Hingis saw a sliver of hope when two double faults from Davenport 
took the defending champion as far as deuce for the first time in 
the match on her opponent's serve. 

Then again, Davenport not only held to 2-1 but raced through  the 
next  three games in quick time to find herself serving  for  the 
championship.  A  double fault gave Hingis the  opening  and  the 
Swiss teenager charged ahead for a volley winner before Davenport 
herself obliged with backhand errors, losing serve on the  second 
breakpoint. 

The  crowd,  sensing  a  Hingis revival,  got  behind  the  young 
champion  who held to 3-5 and broke easily to 4-5 before  holding 
for 5-5, losing just four points in three games. 

``She showed today what a fighter she was. She never gives  up,'' 
said Davenport who, for her part, did well to hold confidently to 
5-5,  rocking  her  opponent back on her heels  with  two  superb 
backhand passes.  In the next game, serving to stay in the  match 
yet  again,  Hingis  sent down a double fault  and  then  made  a 
backhand  error  - she made far too many mistakes on  that  flank 
this afternoon - to find herself tottering on the very brink. 

Davenport  then drew Hingis forward with an angled  backhand  and 
the  three-time  champion half-volleyed wide to  stare  down  the  
barrel at 0-40. Another backhand error from Hingis gave Davenport 
the championship. 

``This  is what you play for. The Grand Slams are  very  special. 
And  every  time  you win one, it is  a  special  moment,''  said 
Davenport, who played with her left thigh strapped to prevent the 
recurrence of a hamstring injury. 

The  last American-born player to win the women's title here  was 
Chris Evert in 1984. Martina Navratilova was already an  American 
citizen  when she won the following year and so was Monica  Seles 
when she won her fourth title here in 1996. 

``I always thought this would be the first Grand Slam I'd win.  I 
like  the  hard courts here and always felt  comfortable  playing 
here,''  said  Davenport. ``It's a great feeling. Now I am  in  a 
position to win all four majors. Not a lot of people have won all 
four,  even  if  it's not in the same year.  Roland  Garros  (the 
French  Open)  is  difficult for me. Clay is just  a  little  bit 
tougher  for me. My movement is not my strongest point  on  clay. 
But I am going to give it the best I can,'' she said. 

Match  statistics: First serve percentage: Davenport  58,  Hingis 
69;  Aces:  Davenport 4, Hingis 1; Double  faults:  Davenport  3, 
Hingis 2; First serve points won: Davenport 70, Hingis 50; Second 
serve points won: Davenport 64, Hingis 37; Winners: Davenport 26, 
Hingis 11; Unforced errors: Davenport 23, Hingis 23; Break  point 
conversions:  Davenport 6 of 9; Hingis 2 of 5; Total points  won: 
Davenport 68, Hingis 45.

Ferreira-Leach win epic battle

Later in the evening, in a wonderfully entertaining men's doubles 
final,  Ellis  Ferreira  (South Africa)  and  Rick  Leach  (U.S.) 
outlasted Wayne Black (Zimbabwe) and Andrew Kratzmann (Aus)  6-4, 
3-6, 6-3, 3-6, 18-16. 

The  match  lasted four hours and 21 minutes with the  final  set 
alone taking two hours and one minute. There are no tiebreaks  in 
the decider in this championship and the first matchpoint came in 
the 26th game of the fifth set. 

Kratzmann sent down two double faults to give Leach and  Ferreira 
a  matchpoint but fought back to make it 13-13. Then,  again,  in 
the 30th game, on Kratzmann's serve, Leach and Ferreira let go of 
two  matchpoints before, finally, closing out the match on  their 
fourth matchpoint on Kratzmann's serve. 

The results: 

Women's  singles final: 2-Lindsay Davenport (U.S.)  bt  1-Martina 
Hingis (Swi) 6-1, 7-5.

Men's doubles final: 5-Ellis Ferreira (RSA) and Rick Leach (U.S.) 
bt 8-Wayne Black (Zim) and Andrew Kratzmann (Aus) 6-4, 3-6,  6-3,  
3-6, 18-16. 

Mixed  doubles  semifinals: 4-Todd Woodbridge (Aus)  and  Arantxa 
Sanchez-Vicario  (Esp) bt David Adams (RSA) and  Kristie  Boogert 
(Hol) 6-3, 6-3; 3-Jared Palmer (U.S.) and Rennae Stubbs (Aus)  bt 
1-Jonas Bjorkman (Swe) and Anna Kournikova (Rus) 7-5, 3-6, 6-3.
