
Exhibiting character in trying situations


By Sanjay Rajan

COLOMBO, JAN. 29. Character is not made in a crisis - it is  only 
exhibited.  Even  as dawn flushed the Colombo sky  pink  the  day 
after  India's  magnificent triumph in the  second  ICC  under-19 
World  Cup,  one sat back to relive and recount the  moments  and 
those  wonderful  boys  who made it  all  possible  -  exhibiting 
character in trying situations. 

It  would  be unfair, really, to pick out individuals in  a  team 
sport  and  say  it  was these three or  four  from  the  14  who 
delivered when it mattered and hence are the heroes. 

But then as Shane Warne would always say, in a battle between two 
teams there also exists little contests, between individuals  and 
situations,   which  makes  it  all  the  more  interesting   and 
invariably the difference. 

Here  one will have to talk about situations. Like, for  example, 
the pressures of a Cup final which invariably stirs up a  turmoil 
of  hopes and fears in an individual. It takes what  in  sporting 
parlance is called the big-match temperament to perform when  the 
spotlight is switched on. 

Reetinder  Singh Sodhi, the vice-captain, displayed  the  cutting 
edge in him with that all-round showing in the final against  Sri 
Lanka which won him the man of the match award. 

The  Punjab  lad is an honest trier and a  hard-worker  with  the 
ability  to  deliver when the chips are down. We saw  him  do  it 
against  the  Lankans in the super-league game where he  made  74 
after the side had lost early wickets. 

A Cup final seems to bring the best out of him. In the summer  of 
'96 in England, Sodhi led from the front, scoring an unbeaten  82 
and taking three wickets with his mediumpace against Pakistan  in 
the final of the Lombard under-15 World Cup. 

It  was a dream come true for Sodhi at the Sinhalese Sports  Club 
ground  on Friday. As he put it, ``It was a big match for all  of 
us.  Losing  in a final can be painful, especially  after  having 
worked  so hard. Md. Kaif and I know how it felt missing a  berth 
in the final in the last World Cup where we beat Pakistan in  the 
final  super-league game but failed to upstage England's Net  Run 
Rate to qualify.'' 

Sodhi  played  like a man possessed in the final. He  bowled  his 
quota  of  10  overs  on  the trot  for  just  26  runs,  took  a 
sensational catch to dismiss Ranil Dhammika, effected the run out 
of  Ganegama  and then made an unbeaten 39 to guide the  side  to 
victory along with the dapper left-hander Niraj Patel.  

The  key  to India's success story was the strength of  the  all-
rounders.  It provided batting depth till No. 8. Then there  were 
the  starts provided by openers Ravneet Ricky and Manish  Sharma. 
The  former, who scored a century and two half- centuries in  the 
competition, was adjudged the best batsman of the tournament. 

The two posted century partnerships against England in the super-
league  and Australia in the semifinals. Sharma is more solid  of 
the two, but when the side was in need of quick runs to take  off 
the pressure Ricky was the better of the two. 

While talking about the depth in the batting we should take  note 
of  the balance in the order. India had Md. Kaif, a  grafter,  at 
No. 3, a hard-hitting southpaw Yuveraj Singh at No. 4, the gritty 
Sodhi at No. 5, a left-hander with a sensible head in Niraj Patel 
at No. 6, followed by Venugopala Rao and Ajay Ratra, a very  good 
wicketkeeper. 

Niraj  Patel, one with a bright future, played the  support  role 
superbly  right  through while Yuveraj, adjudged the man  of  the 
tournament, is capable of winning matches singlehandedly when  on 
roll. 

Yuveraj  displayed  his  prowess against  New  Zealand  where  he 
performed  the star-turn with a half century. Later, we  saw  him 
tear apart Australia with a quickfire 58, coming in 25 deliveries 
with five sixes and an equal number of boundaries. 

Each and every member of the side rose up to the occasion and  it 
was  this  which  won the Cup. It's what you  do  when  you  have 
nothing  to do that reveals what you are. These  young  champions 
stood  up  and stayed together, played as a team  to  make  India 
proud. 
