
An Andy Ram act all the way 


By S.R. Suryanarayan

CHENNAI,  JAN. 29. Winner Andy Ram surprised everyone,  including 
the   vanquished,  top  seed  Ladislav  Svarc.   Tongue   lashing 
apparently  was just one facet of this third seed's  personality, 
the  other,  as presented on Saturday, was that of  an  efficient 
player  who  would do no wrong. Sure enough, Ram  made  favourite 
Svarc  look like a non-performer in bagging the singles title  in 
the   TNTA'75-   Futures  men's  tennis   championship   at   the 
Nungambakkam Stadium.

As though to reinforce that it was his moment or rather  Israel's 
day in the championship, Ram, partnering Nir Welgreen annexed the 
doubles title also, beating the Slovakian pair of Ladislav  Svarc 
and Boris Borgula in three tiring sets. 

It  was  an  amazing exhibition of controlled  tennis  where  the 
Israeli's  restraint  was only on his tongue.  His  crisp  serves 
found  the  depth,  the returns went  tantalisingly  low  but  to 
perfection, and there were the volleys that brooked no stopping. 

For a player like Svarc, who seemed to be riding on the crest  of 
success  from  the  way he had galloped to the  summit  round  in 
keeping  with  his  top  seeding status,  Ram's  was  a  sort  of 
mesmerizing  act  that  he had not  bargained  for.  Svarc  found 
everything,  including  executing  his usually  sharp  serves  or 
getting  the  right range in the returns, a  struggle.  Why,  the 
Slovakian  was even penalised thrice, for foot-faulting.  All  of 
these left Svarc, for a change, raising cries of despair.

The start itself was ominous for Svarc as Ram uncorked his  fine-
tuned game straight away to break serve. There was no let up from 
then on for Svarc. Normally one to give all indications that  the 
humid  weather was draining him, Ram put all that signs in  tight 
wraps as he went about clinically decimating his rival's game and 
aspirations. 

What  stood  out in Ram's approach was his brilliant  back  hand, 
particularly when hit down the line. More than once, he had Svarc 
standing awe struck with the sheer pace of his shots.

Though  there were rallies galore (alas, not many in  the  chairs 
around  to savour !) it was only in the tenth game that Ram,  for 
once,  was pushed to deuce. Surely he too was not above  tension, 
for after all this was his first final in three-legs. 

He  was  a  semifinalist  in Hyderabad, but  did  not  cross  the 
quarterfinals in Bangalore. A fighter to the core, Svarc smelt  a 
possible  success  coming in that crucial game, but  his  erratic 
play  undid  his intentions and Ram grabbed a huge  advantage  by 
winning the opening set. 

The  second  set progressed with each holding serves,  but  Svarc 
with  difficulty until Ram had Svarc reeling 0-40 in the  seventh 
game. The Slovakian came up with the occasional aces to  wriggled 
out, only momentarily though. He did force the deuce but Ram  had 
the final say as he broke the serve. The fight, Ram repeated that 
in  the  ninth game to finish off Svarc in such an  emphatic  way 
that  he richly deserved the $1,300 prize money for  the  singles 
and another $315 as his share in the doubles win. 

Svarc  had to be content with $900 and another $165 as  runner-up 
in the doubles too.

Mr. Bernard Alter, the U.S. Consul General, gave away the  prizes 
for the singles, and Mr. N. Kumar, president, TNTA did so for the 
doubles.

The  results  (all final): singles: Andy Ram  (ISR)  bt  Ladislav 
Svarc  (SVK) 6- 4, 6-3. Doubles: Andy Ram/Nir Welgreen  (ISR)  bt 
Ladislav Svarc/Boris Borgula (SVK) 6-4, 5-7, 6-4.
