
Olonga rips through England innings 


By Ted Corbett

CAPE  TOWN,  JAN.  28. Henry Olonga, the  Zimbabwe  fast  bowler, 
bowling  at top pace, snatched five wickets in succession to  set 
up victory against England in the triangular tournament match  at 
Newlands  tonight.  Zimbabwe has a proud record  against  England 
with six wins in eight matches; England must once again hang  its 
head in shame after being dismissed for its fourth lowest  score. 
At  one time it seemed likely to be all out for under the  worst, 
the 93 against Australia in the 1975 World Cup semifinal. 

Olonga,  who had previously taken 28 wickets at 31 runs  each  in 
his 21 one-day International appearances, had figures of 8-3-18-5 
when  he  went  off soon after England was 47 for  six.  Why  his 
captain Andy Flower sent him to field in the deep until the  last 
wicket proved difficult is impossible to understand. Maybe it was 
an act of naive stupidity; perhaps a moment of compassion. Olonga 
is a Christian, down to his dreadlocks, so we may assume he  felt 
the  need to be merciful but in the end Flower had to recall  him 
to apply the coup de grace. 

He needed only two more balls to get rid of young Chris Read  and 
return with figures of six for 19. 

He  began  with the wicket of opener Nick  Knight,  palpably  lbw 
plunging  forward in his usual heavy-footed way, had Graeme  Hick 
caught  behind two balls later, Vikram Solanki taken overhead  at 
point after two flashing fours, bowled the captain Nasser Hussain 
and had Chris Adams snatched up at slip. 

It  was a superb exhibition of fast bowling which  left  England, 
which  needed only 212, gasping as it tried to avoid  its  lowest 
ever  score, 93 against Australia in the World Cup back in  1975. 
Now it seems that England and Zimbabwe will have to battle  right 
to the last match to decide which team meets South Africa in  the 
final at Wanderers on February 14. 

``I  am disappointed in the shot selection shown by  my  batsmen. 
Now  it  is  up to them to show an improvement in  the  next  few 
matches,''  said Hussain, normally a cricketer who meets  victory 
and defeat with a cheerful face. Tonight he looked as if he could 
cry. 

Zimbabwe  has  nothing to fear despite its heavy beating  at  the 
hands of South Africa in the opening match of this tournament. 

Since that night a week ago it had been away and sorted out  some 
of the worst aspects of its game. 

Its score of 211, a winning total on this strange one- day  pitch 
at  Newlands, was built around a laboured 97 from  Neil  Johnson,  
its opening batsman who would not be deterred from his purpose of 
batting  all the way through the innings. He succeeded until  the 
48th  when he gave Hick his second astonishing outfield catch  of 
the night, high above his head and about to sail into the crowd. 

Earlier  Hick  had caught a ball from Grant Flower that  went  so 
high  - as Hick circled underneath from square leg to long leg  - 
that the batsmen crossed twice. 

Hick now has the England record with 53 catches in his 99th  one-
dayer. 

Darren  Gough  got the wicket that makes him the  second  highest 
wicket taker for England with 116. Ian Botham has 145 but part of 
England's problem is that it plays so rarely and it will be years 
before  it has a bowler to get close to Wasim Akram and the  real 
giants of the one-day game. 
