
Mohun Bagan puts up an impressive show


By Our Sports Reporter

CALCUTTA, JAN. 29. Mohun Bagan brightened its title hopes with  a 
3-1 verdict over Manaksia Tollygunge Agragami in their concluding 
first phase encounter of the National Football League here at the 
Ravindra Sarovar Stadium on Saturday. The win capped a successful 
first  phase for the Calcutta giant which tallied 22 points  from 
11  matches  to  meet Churchill Brothers on top  of  the  12-team 
league table. 

Churchill,  however, has played a match less and meets JCT  Mills 
at Ludhiana on Sunday to draw curtains on the first phase of  the 
tournament.

Agragami, which began its NFL campaign with a win over Kingfisher 
East  Bengal  and  emerged  the best  among  the  Calcutta  teams 
tallying  10 points from three wins and a draw after  the  fourth 
round,  now finds itself languishing in the ninth spot. The  last 
seven  rounds  have seen the team losing four and  drawing  three 
matches  to add only three points to its fourth round  tally  and 
finish with 13 points at the end of the first phase.

The  match  today enthralled almost a capacity  crowd  of  around 
17,000  as Mohun Bagan, after playing five `away' matches on  the 
trot  in  a protracted outstation assignment of around  20  days, 
came up with another home win today. 

Bagan  defeated arch-rival East Bengal, 1-0, on January 3  before 
beginning its tour of Kochi, Bangalore and Margao. The win  today 
is  a sequel of its successful `away' venture which  found  Bagan 
returning with nine points from two wins and three draws.

The home crowd also had the first sight of the team's two  latest 
recruits, Igor Shkivirin and Brazilian Jose Rameirez Barreto, who 
had set the real difference as Bagan successfully negotiated  its 
Goa  rivals  Salgaocar,  Dempo and  Churchill  Brothers  in  Goa. 
Shkivirin,  playing his sixth NFL match, was quick to reveal  his 
striking prowess timing a neat volley in the 11th minute to guide 
home a minus by Dulal Biswas (1-0).

Continuing its total domination in the match, Bagan found Stephan 
Abarowei  in a new role as the Nigerian forward put  a  brilliant 
left-footed  finish  on  a rebound of his own shot  in  the  16th 
minute  that  had come off a Agragami defender (2-0).  The  first 
session ended with Bagan dictating the proceedings. 

The  tempo  stretched into the second session  and  saw  Abarowei 
coming  up  with  another example  of  effective  finishing.  The 
Nigerian  forward, who was located with a piercing through-  pass 
by  Barreto  in the 51st minute, cleared his marker with  a  body 
feint  and drew the Agragami custodian, Bivas Ghosh, wide on  the  
left  before  angling  his shot past the far post to  make  it  a 
spectacular goal.

Sitting  on a 3-0 cushion, a sense of complacency seemed to  grip 
the  green-and-maroon  brigade  as Agragami began  to  wrest  the 
initiative.  By  55th  minute  of  the  second  session  Agragami 
midfielders could bee seen covering a lot of space in the middle. 
Chandan  Das,  doing  well as the centre-half,  spread  both  the 
flanks  with  regular  passes. Ayoyemi Isiaka  and  Sasthi  Duley 
complemented  well  on the flanks in their task as the  left  and 
right  outside  forwards. It was Isiaka who sent  in  a  measured 
cross from right and Duley complemented with a tap to reduce  the 
margin in the 59th minute (3-1). 

But  the  good work Agragami had begun seemed a  bit  delayed  as 
Bagan preserved the scoreline thereafter. 
