
Saba Karim is ready and waiting


By Our Sports Reporter

PUNE, JAN. 29. When he started playing at the first class  level, 
Syed  Kirmani was still around, but Saba Karim is still  fighting 
for  a  berth  in  the  Indian  team  with  third  generation  of 
wicketkeepers like M.S.K. Prasad.

Saba  Karim  was never able to consolidate his  position  in  the 
Indian squad. In his early years, Kirmani was out of the team but 
trying  desperately  to make a comeback; then  there  were  Kiran 
More, Chandrakant Pandit and Sadanand Viswanath, all good keepers 
in their own right.

Thus  Saba Karim got a national call only after about four  years 
at  the  domestic level, for a tour of the West Indies,  but  was 
again out of favour till a couple of seasons back. 

Not  having been able to nudge Nayan Mongia, Saba Karim is  still 
slogging it out. 

``I do have hopes of coming back,'' he said after East ended  its 
campaign in the Deodhar Trophy with two wins in four matches.

An  unbeaten 102 against Central Zone and a 98 against West  Zone 
were crucial knocks, which separated Saba Karim from the rest  of 
the 'keepers in the premier one day tournament of the country. 

``I  am  happy at the way I am batting, but feel I  should  be  a 
little  more consistent behind the stumps,'' he said,  forthright 
as ever. ``Though we (East) would have liked to win more matches, 
I am satisfied with my own performance,'' added the former  Bihar 
(now Bengal) wicketkeeper.

Saba Karim is definitely one of the most experienced  campaigners 
at  the  domestic  level,  who  is  happy  that  there  are  more 
opportunities now. 

``With so much cricket on, there are bound to be more open  slots 
off and on. The general feeling is that the toil at the  domestic 
level is bound to be rewarded. Some good performances can  propel 
one  into the National squad, thus there is hope for  everyone,'' 
said the soft-spoken man.

``In  my early days, there was so much competition and so  little 
in the name of chances. The cases of injury too were less, simply 
because  so much cricket was not played then. Thus, to  get  into 
the  Indian team, one had to wait for some one to do  badly.  And 
when it came to wicketkeeping, the field was really tough. It  is 
definitely easier to get the nod now,'' Saba Karim said.

If  the  Deodhar  Trophy  is a  barometer,  then  Saba  Karim  is  
definitely a contender for the wicketkeeper's job. 

He is fit as a fiddle, doing well behind the stumps, and the runs 
are  coming  in tons. But will the selectors  consider  his  case 
again? 
