
The season that was


The just concluded Madras season was nothing more than the  usual 
song  and  dance routine. The steadily dwindling  audiences,  the 
criteria  adopted for selection of dancers and poor  presentation 
aesthetics  make LEELA VENKATARAMAN plead for induction of  fresh 
ideas to keep the festival fire burning.

SOME  things  never change. One of them, at  least  according  to 
diehards  in  Chennai,  is what is commonly referred  to  as  the 
"season", when music and dance acquire centrality for about eight 
weeks,  drowning  out even the high decibel  level  of  political 
convulsions.  What  started  off as a move  by  highly  motivated 
people during the 1927 AICC session, to counter the influence  of 
western culture, fast luring into its vortex the younger element, 
has  over the years, burgeoned into the massive  classical  music 
and dance spread, offered by ever increasing number of Sabhas all 
over Chennai. As this year's cultural bash comes to an end, it is 
time to have a bird's eye view of the total scene in  retrospect, 
with special emphasis on the public response to this gluttony  of 
classical dance and music.

For  most  visitors from outside Chennai, like this  critic,  the 
dwindling  air of expectancy was noticeable. Where was  all  that 
air  of  crackling  excitement? True, the  annual  sprinkling  of 
foreigners,  who  travel to Chennai with the express  purpose  of 
taking  in  this  event,  could be  seen.  But  the  non-resident 
artistes settled abroad, who invariably try to make their  annual 
visit  to India coincide with the season, were less in  evidence. 
Those  who  did come, did not mince words while  discussing  what 
they  had  seen and heard. They found the tenor of  the  academic 
side  of  the  season  in  particular,  namely  the  papers   and 
discussions  in various lecture-demonstration sessions, like  the 
Natya Kala Conference, at times, "mediocre", and at others  good. 
The  glaring  absence  of any festival  at  Kalakshetra  was  the 
subject  of  avid  corridor gossip and  exchange.  "What  is  the 
matter?  Have management staff relations deteriorated to a  point 
when  what  had been annually held for so many years  had  to  be 
scrapped off the calendar of events?"

The  season,  as those who attend it regularly know,  has  always 
been  a  strong  affirmation of the  cultural  identity  of  this 
region. If Bharatanatyam and Carnatic music are the main artistic 
pillars of its programming edifice, it is because these represent 
the  cultural  signature of this region, and  hence  every  other 
regional  art  form can only find fringe space in  this  cultural 
scenario. Be that as it may, there is need for induction of  some 
fresh ideas to keep the festival fire burning brightly. And  this 
is what seems to be conspicuous by its absence. It has become the 
usual  song and dance routine which is acquiring a jaded look  in 
the  minds  of people, and one does not know  if  organisers  are 
conscious of the need to rev up enthusiasm which is waning.

One  disturbing trend is the steadily dwindling audiences.  While 
attendance  for both music and dance programmes was not  what  it 
should  have been, the former was marginally better off than  the 
latter. Why have years of exposure not sensitised more people  to 
the  classical arts and added to the group of  enthusiasts?  What 
with  MTV  and  the  fast  mushrooming  crop  of  film  screening 
channels,  home entertainment offers several options.  Under  the 
circumstances,  only the exceptionally motivated dance and  music 
bugg  is  going  to brave the  harrowing  transport  and  traffic 
tangles to attend a performance in the Sabhas.

* * *

Even a rare event like the exhibition of over 200 photographs and 
other  illustrative  material on the theme of "Yearning  for  the 
Spiritual  Ideal: Indian Influence on Western Dance  (1626-1999)" 
mounted  in the foyer of the Narada Gana Sabha  Gyanananda  Hall, 
drew a very disappointing number of people. The occasion was made 
possible  thanks  to  the efforts  of  Canadian  visitor  Vincent 
Warren,  curator  of  la Bibliotheque de la Dance  at  the  Ecole 
Superieure  de  Dance  du Quebec,  Montreal,  and  teacher  dance 
history.  The  event  was  sponsored  by  Samudri's  Centre   for 
International Cultural Interaction. Vincent Warren also delivered 
a  lecture  on the subject of Western Dance being  influenced  by 
Indian  ideals. While much of the 18th and 19th  century  details 
are  known to dance historians in India, the seventeenth  century 
material was unknown and proved fascinating. More evocative  were 
the film clippings of live shows which went with the lecture. The 
apathy to such an event was surprising, to say the least.

Sponsorships are less easy to come by say, Sabha Secretaries  and 
this  year, due to various other considerations, the  season  was 
scaled down by a week. Even so to watch worthy dancers performing 
before audiences of thirty to forty people in enclosures meant to 
seat  five hundred and above, often made one wonder for whom  all 
this fare was meant.

The  contours of the popularity chart in the scene  of  classical 
music  would seem to change much faster than in the dance  arena. 
Gone to the hinterland are the glamour names among vocalists  who 
but two years ago were the rage. Now at the top of the chart  are 
young  names  like  T.  M. Krishna,  Sanjay  Subramaniam  and  P. 
Unnikrishnan  with veterans like K. S. Narayanasamy  and  Lalgudi 
Jayaraman  (among the instrumentalists) and T. N.  Krishnan  with 
the  likes of O. S. Thyagarajan, T. N. Seshagopalan  (to  mention 
only  a few) forming the steady core with a committed  following. 
In  dance  on the other hand, it is still Malavika  Sarukkai  and 
Alarmel Valli who draw larger audiences. One other person who for 
the  last  three years has had the distinction of  performing  to 
handsome audience turnouts is Leela Samson. The Jugalbandi at the 
Krishna  Gana Sabha in which she teamed up with  Odissi  exponent 
Madhavi  Mudgal,  proved  a big draw. Most of  the  other  senior 
dancers  performed  to middling or poor audiences.  Persons  like 
Priya Govind, Manjari Chandrasekhar, Swapna Sundari, A.  Lakshman 
deserved   larger  audiences.  Among  the  dance   drama   events  
Bharatakalanjali's 'Mahaabhaarata' drew a large turnout.

What one finds quite amazing is the equanimity with which dancers 
accept  the  prospect  of a handful  of  persons  watching  their 
efforts.  "We  are  used to this"  was  one  resigned  statement. 
Barring  close friends and relatives and the odd curious  visitor 
who  happens  to  stray into the auditorium,  dancers  have  been 
trained  to  expect  very  little  audience  support.  While  one 
appreciates  the  ability to want quality and not  quantity,  one 
also  gets  the feeling that rarely has so much been done  by  so 
many, for so few.

"Why  then  do you clamour for platforms during  the  season?"  I 
asked some dancers.

"Because this has come to be regarded as the symbol of acceptance 
of  one's artistic credentials. Anybody who is somebody in  dance 
has to register a presence in this festival."

A strong defender of the entire seasonal effort had this to  say: 
"There  is no lessening of interest. It is just that people  have 
become more selective and better informed."

That is a statement which is as true as false, for audiences  are 
always  a  motley  blend of a small section  of  people  who  are 
sensitive  to  the nuances of the dance, with  a  large  majority 
which  is  less informed. Collectively,  audience  responses  are 
unprepredictable.  While an already slender audience  walked  out 
almost  to the last man when Anita Ratnam's Adhirohana was  being 
presented   at  one  auditorium,  the  response  was   far   more 
encouraging when the same production was staged in another sabha. 
Speed,  theatrical melodrama and dazzling costumes still  sway  a 
large number of persons. A fast teermanam rendered with less than 
impeccable rhythm, often invites warm applause in the middle of a 
varnam  while  brilliantly  set sequences  rendered  with  rhythm 
control  the  madhyam  laya,  and  an  aesthetic  feel  for  well 
coordinated  nattuvangam  and dance, will  draw  little  audience 
reaction. The gap between performer and audience seems to be more 
in  dance  programmes. In music, one finds  the  instant  rapport 
between  the listener and the musician. One can get the vibes  of 
joy that the audience is experiencing from listening to the music 
- a situation less frequent in the case of dance recitals.

Presentation  aesthetics  have  never  been a  great  part  of  a 
season's offerings. The logo of the Sabha pinned on the  backdrop 
interfering  with one's view of the dance lines as the  performer 
moves on the stage, indifferent sound arrangements with poor mike 
balancing,  muffled announcements are still the legacy  of  tardy 
attention  to  the stage. But one  also saw heartening  signs  of 
awareness  of  how  stage space should be  free  of  impediments. 
Bharat   Kalachar  has  done  away  with  its  altar  and   photo 
memorabilia  at  the  side which used to eat  up  valuable  stage 
space. Now it is a clean performance area, for the dancer to fill 
up  with  her  presence  through  the  art.  Malavika  Sarukkai's 
Bharatanatyam  here  was a treat to watch. The Indian  Fine  Arts  
Society  too has shifted the garlanded portraits of  the  musical 
trinity to one side and the stage is now uncluttered.

Dance  has always occupied second place in this  festival.  While 
its main platforms are provided by Sri Krishna Gana Sabha, Narada 
Gana  Sabha, Bharat Kalachar and Kartik Fine Arts, the Fine  Arts 
Society and Nungambakkam Cultural Centre also provide some  slots 
for dance. For the Music Academy the main thrust has always  been 
to  present Carnatic classical music, with a sprinkling of  three 
to four dance events.

The criteria applied for selection of dancers will ever remain an 
enigma.  While  it is good that many young dancers are  also  now 
being featured in the festival, one is still not clear about  the 
logic of selection which remains a Sabha's inhouse concern.

Referring to the uphill task of persuading Sabhas to take note of 
prowess,  one  dancer  remarked, "They tell  us  that  they  want 
dancers who can attract audiences. Tell me. How does one  attract 
audiences  unless one gets to be known and for that one  needs  a 
platform. It is like saying that one will not be allowed to enter 
the water unless one knows how to swim!"

If  being  able to pull people is the criterion as made  out,  it 
would  seem  that three quarters of the season would have  to  be 
shut  down,  for a good audience turnout is an  exception  rather 
than  the  rule.  So why hold this as  a  condition  for  wannabe 
performers only?

One  other  glaring feature was the dwindling  quality  of  vocal 
support  for the dance recitals. Tired voices, off key  and  with 
little steam were heard once too often. Singing for dance,  while 
a  lucrative  profession while it lasts, is  also  an  inhibiting 
factor for a musician aspiring for solo status, for he or she  is 
always  in  danger  of being branded as an  accompanist  for  the 
dance, and hence a lesser artiste. According to a senior teacher/ 
dancer,  for violinists like Kalaiarasan and Sikhamani (the  list 
is  by no means exhaustive) opportunities for solo playing go  by 
default  merely because the artists provide music for dance.  The 
few good singers who opt to sing for dance being in great demand, 
want  to make a fast buck (understandably so) while the going  is 
good.  Booked  to  sing for  too  many  performances,  inadequate 
rehearsals  with the dancer and enfeebled and sore voices  become 
the  inevitable aftermath. Alarmel Valli during the festival,  on 
seeing  the  listless singing of the vocalist  during  rehearsals 
thanks  to  overuse of the vocal cords, quickly changed  over  to 
another singer for the next performance. But not every dancer can 
command  similar  facilities  and to make do  with  whatever  the 
musician  doles  out at that point of time, becomes part  of  the 
endurance  test for the dancer. In all the headache of  gathering 
together a team of musicians and rehearsing at least a couple  of 
times  before  the performance, the one performer  who  is  never 
sufficiently remunerated is the dancer.

It  was  heartening  to see the odd slot provided  for  the  male  
dancers.  In  Bharatanatyam,  a hangover from  the  days  of  the 
devadasi has conditioned minds into thinking of this dance as the 
exclusive preserve of women. Male dancers are still the also rans 
who  find it twice as hard to prove their mettle.  While  dancers 
like  A.  Lakshman, Rajesh and Zakkir Hussein  were  featured  in 
Sabhas  like  the  Krishna Gana Sabha and Narada  Gana  Sabha,  a 
dancer like Narendra had only one slot and that as Krishna in the 
dance drama 'Mahaabhaarata'. Even Lakshman who is struggling  for 
some  recognition has been outstripped by his  female  colleagues 
who are permanent features of the main festival panel for Sabhas. 
There  are also some very finished male dancers in Karnataka  who 
deserve  a chance in the season. But when even the  Chennai  male 
dancer finds the going so tough, the male dancer residing outside 
has  a very remote chance of being noticed. Public attitudes  die 
hard.

The only one of its type in the entire country, the season,  with 
all  its  drawbacks is a precious heritage which  should  not  be 
lost.  To  revive its sagging fortunes, some  fresh  thinking  is 
called  for  - some ideas which will bring in a  certain  newness 
without  in  any  way eroding the  cultural  specificity  of  the 
festival. The challenges are more in dance which in its rehearsed 
expression  can create a feeling of deja vu. Music on  the  other 
hand,  which  is  so guided by  the  musicians's  improvisational 
inspiration  for  the  moment  will  always  be  unique  in  each 
performance.  Complacency  that what has been shown so  far  will 
continue  to be relevant to the audiences, can be the undoing  of 
what  ever  has  been achieved in  classical  dance  through  the 
seasonal effort all these years. 
