
A little sunshine, a lot more gloom


The International Film Festival of India continued with its  ugly 
imagery even during the concluding days, though there were a  few 
works  of  wit  and beauty that  gladdened  one's  heart,  writes 
GAUTAMAN BHASKARAN.

THERE was some sparkling cinema in the second half of the  recent 
International Film Festival of India in New Delhi. But the annual 
event's  urge  to meander along listlessly seemed  as  suicidally 
strong  in  the concluding days as it had in the  earlier  phase. 
Even  the  subjects  continued to be grim  and  dismal.  Disease, 
religious  bigotry, incest, jealousy and war ravaged the  screen, 
and the millennium's first ever Festival - anywhere on the  globe 
- did not evoke beautiful thoughts.

There  were two notable exceptions to this generally  bleak  mood 
that  I  would find it hard to forget. One came from  China:  Hou 
Jianqi's "Postmen in the Mountains". It was so lyrical, so evenly 
paced  that it left a sweet feeling in me. A postman retires  and 
initiates  his  son  into  the  profession.  A  poignant  journey 
follows: the older man takes his son on his last trek across  the 
hills and valleys, and the scenic settings not only add a dash of 
poetry,  but  help the father to float  through  sweet  memories. 
Unhurried in pace, poetic in quality, "Postmen in the  Mountains" 
told  me  that the medium could be refreshingly joyful  when  its 
makers wanted it to be so.

Kitano Takeshi, the Japanese auteur, is another man who discarded 
brutality  and sadism in his latest offering, "Kikujiro". In  the 
1998 Rotterdam Film Festival - where his "Hana-Bi" was shown - he 
said he was tired of critics asking him about the violence in his 
pictures,  and so he was determined to make one without  any.  He 
added that he wanted to make a road movie. Would it be like  what 
Wim Wenders used to ? "No", more like the "Wizard of Oz", Takeshi 
replied.

And  "Kikujiro" turned out to be exactly that. It is quite  close 
to the spirit of "Oz". The plot is simple: Masao is alone  during 
his  school  summer vacation, and Kikujiro, the  lazy,  good-for-
nothing  guy, is ordered by his wife to keep the  child  company. 
Kiku  does  precisely that, and tries his best to  entertain  the 
boy. When Masao is distraught and lonely, the man offers to  take 
the  little  one  to  his mother. But  the  meeting  never  comes 
through,  though  the journey itself is a kind of  fantasy  where 
Masao meets many adults, all trying their best to humour  him.(It 
was sheer stupidity to have scheduled "Kikujiro" at the same time 
as the closing ceremony was going on.)

Another  exquisite  work  was Pedro  Almodovar's  "All  About  My 
Mother".  Call  it tonic for the bruised  and  battered  Festival 
soul,  it  blazed  with multiples of breathless  stories  in  the 
prevailing atmosphere of minimalism. This film shows Almodovar at  
his  mature  and balanced best, capable of weaving  a  yarn  that 
enters  effortlessly  into  the  art  and  heart.  Although   his 
characters  are  not overtly inspiring - the  pregnant  nun,  the 
prima  donna actress and her drug addict, lesbian lover  and  the 
transvestite hooker - each one has the strength to build a  story 
around her/him. There is a certain complexity and vitality  about 
them,  and that pushes "All About My Mother" into another  realm. 
Above all, it was sheer cinema, shorn of pretensions.

Amos  Gitai's  "Sacred"  and  Luc Besson's  "Joan  of  Arc"  were 
undoubtedly way behind Almodovar's movie, but their searing  look 
at  religious practices touched me. Gitai makes a  powerful  case 
for making religion human: his Israeli protagonist has to abandon 
the wife he loves because sexual intercourse and procreation  are 
linked  in  a  suffocating union. When  she  fails  to  conceive, 
orthodoxy forces him to move away from her and take another mate.

"Joan of Arc" is one we all know about, but her story never fails 
to  disturb us. A 19-year-old French peasant girl is  ordered  by 
the voice of god to save her future king and her country, and she 
does precisely that with terrible consequences. She was burnt  as 
a  heretic  in 1431, and it took the Vatican  five  centuries  to 
condone her. Besson does underline the cruelty that was heaped on 
the simple lass, but his temptation to picturise the concept in a 
truly Hollywood style, with loud music and special effects,  mars 
what  could have been a powerful attempt at recreating a  bit  of 
interesting history. Besson seems to be getting deeper into  this 
mess: one remembers his "The Fifth Element" some years ago  where 
truly American Bruce Willis chips in his bit to take the director 
far away from European cinema. 

Mercifully,  this trend is still limited to a few, as one saw  it 
in  the  Festival. Most of Europe still guards  against  American 
cultural  invasion. The Spanish creator, Carlos Saura,  for  one, 
could have easily bitten into the poison apple: his "Tango" (seen 
two years ago at Cannes) is a tale of deceit, love and envy - all 
convincingly portrayed through the dance - he relies entirely  on 
Spanish nuances to narrate it.

Manoel de Oliveira from Portugal captures the dilemma of a  woman 
in  "La  Lettre"  who is torn between three  men,  including  her 
husband.  In  the  end, she rejects  consensual  love  and  joins 
missionaries to help Africa's victims of war and povert.

There were others like Tim Roth and Jasmin Dizdar, both  British, 
who appeared to have learnt the craft from the big banners in the 
U.S.,  but  were prudent enough to maintain their own  style  and 
pace.  Roth's  "The War Zone" handles incest:  the  extraordinary 
horror  grips  a  teenager when he  finds  out  the  relationship 
between  his father and elder sister. It estranges him  from  the 
family  and pushes him into a nightmare. Roth resorts to  British 
realism,  careful  compositions and deliberate  editing  to  veer 
towards  a reverential treatment of the theme. There  is  nothing 
prurient  or  sensational  here, nothing  exploitative,  and  the 
picture maintains a studied impassivity. 

Dizdar's  "Beautiful  People" marries romance  and  politics.  It 
takes a good look at the ethnic conflict in Europe, but the stage 
is London, where different people act out their parts. And in the 
depressing scenario, there is life. A doctor tells his patient  - 
a woman bent on aborting her child, the result of her being raped 
by soldiers - that it does not take much to make life  beautiful. 
And  she  listens to him, and even begins to adore her  child.  A 
nurse  tells a turbulent ward that they have come to hospital  to 
heal, and "Beautiful People" wants to cast this magic message  on 
its audience.

The  Festival's  closing  shot, Fernando  Solanas's  "The  Cloud" 
merely  affirms  this,  but  through  theatre  and  wit.  An  old 
independent   theatre   in  Buenos  Aires  is   threatened   with 
demolition,  but  its actors, caught between helplessness  and  a 
passion  for  the  art,  are  determined  to  say  "no"  to  such 
destruction.  "The  Cloud"  is  splendidly  allegorical,  and   a 
peculiar  imagery reveals the ills of modernism: the  people  are 
walking  backward,  the  cars  are  moving  backward  -   perhaps 
signifying  the many losses of our times. Conflict and  animosity 
are  just about two, and moviemakers appear to be  filling  their 
screens with them, probably as a way of warning us.

In  the bargain, cinema begins to look less and less pleasing  or 
attractive, though fortunately the Delhi Festival had a dozen  or 
so films that saved the event from slipping into a coma. 

(Concluded)
