
Casting of horoscope


HOROSCOPES  are  cast using Panchangas  (Almanacs),  taking  into 
account  birth  and sunrise times. Even on one and the  day,  the 
time of sunrise differs from place to place according to latitude 
and longitude, though for our country we have one uniform  Indian 
Standard Time.

Horoscopes  are cast too by using Tables of Ascendants  going  by 
Sidereal Time and Local Mean Time.

For  casting  a proper horoscope, it is advisable to use  a  Drik 
Panchangam  as  well  as Tables of  Ascendants.  Birth  Star  and 
planetary  positions  can be calculated and placed  in  Rasi  and 
Navamsa  Charts  by referring to the  Panchangam  and  Ephemeris, 
considering  the Nirayana position. Maha Dasas and  Bhukthis  are 
calculated  from the time of birth and the Moon's position,  with 
reference  to  the  total duration of the  natal  star,  and  the 
balance  duration yet to elapse at the time of birth.  These  can 
walso be calculated with reference to the Moon's position as  set 
out in Ephemerides and using Logarithms.

Computer  programmes  nowadays  can save  astrologers  a  lot  of 
calculation work and time.

Good dates: February 3 from 4 p.m. and February 4 upto 6 p.m.

* * *

Queries answered

Astronomers say the Moon is a natural satellite of Earth. But, in 
horoscope  the Moon is considered a Planet. Why should there  not 
be a different treatment between a satellite and a Planet?

Ramakrishnan R., Chennai-17

In our astrology not only the Moon, but the Sun which is a  star, 
and the Nodes, Rahu and Kethu, are called "Planets". The Sun  and 
the  Moon are vital luminaries for Earth and its beings. The  Sun 
represents Jeeva and Father. The Moon represents Mind and Mother. 
The  Nodes play roles in Solar and Lunar eclipses. Ancient  sages 
have  regarded the indispensable role played by the Sun  and  the 
Moon  on the body and the mind of humans, and on mundane  action. 
Calling the Sun a star and the Moon a satellite, will not  affect 
this position. The "Brihad Jataka" does not mention the Nodes  as 
Planets  but the "Brihat Samhita" does. Some  modern  astrologers 
record  the  positions  of  Neptune, Uranus  and  Pluto  too,  in 
horoscopes.
