
Gandhi through German eyes


As a young man in Nazi Germany, Herbert Fischer was influenced by 
Gandhiji's ideals. To him, the Mahatma seemed to combine a simple 
life  with anti-authoritarian politics. This led him to  work  in 
India  with  Gandhi. RAMACHANDRA GUHA, who  interviewed  Fischer, 
refers to an essay written by the latter... a fitting tribute on 
Martyr's Day today. 

IN  a  little apartment off Lubecke strasse  in  central  Berlin, 
there  is a Gandhi Informations Zentrum run by two  knowledgeable 
followers  of  the  Mahatma.  Christian  Bartolf  is  scholar  of 
pacifism   and   counsellor  to  the  young  German   males   who 
conscientiously  object to military service. His colleague  Peter 
Ruhe  is  a  former  computer  engineer  who  has  an   extensive 
collection  of Gandhi photographs. The walls of their Centre  are 
lined with books, the file cabinets taken up with photo-negatives 
and  photocopies  of  letters written  to  Europeans  by  Gandhi. 
Outside  of India and the great American universities, theirs  is 
perhaps the finest collection of Gandhiana.

The  German  interest  in Gandhi is strong, and  most  of  it  is 
recent.  It  owes  itself  to  the  process  of  rethinking   and 
researching that followed the Second World War. From the turn  of 
this  century  until 1945, the Germans had been  among  the  most 
violent of modern peoples. However, after the end of the War they 
sought to lose themselves in civilian production and consumption. 
They  vigorously  and  collectively  pursued  affluence,  till  a 
section  of  the  young began to dissent.  From  the  1960s,  the 
environmental  movement  provided  the focal  point  for  a  more 
general re-appraisal of the military-industrial complex.  Germany 
was  a front-line state in the Cold War: indeed, it was the  only 
nation to have two sections, one on either side. Nowhere else was 
the  opposition to nuclear arms and nuclear energy  as  strident. 
Simultaneously, and in common with other Western countries, there 
was  also a reaction against the excesses of consumerism,  and  a 
growing interest in spiritualism and the simple life.

It  was two German thinkers, Ivan Illich and Wolfgang Sachs,  who 
provided  the most penetrating critiques of industrialism.  Their 
analyses of modern technology and its dehumanisation of life were 
inspired   by  Gandhi.  Meanwhile,  the  Gandhian  legacy   found 
institutional expression in the Green Party, with its  commitment 
to  pacifism, to inter-generational and inter-national  equality, 
and  to  the participation of women in public  life.  The  German 
Greens  have,  of course, drawn from other sources as  well,  but 
they  are  nevertheless  the most Gandhi-like  of  any  political 
movement of our time.

This essay recalls an older German connection to the Mahatma. The 
connection begins with Herman Kallenbach, the architect of Jewish 
extraction  who,  in  May 1910, gifted Gandhi  1,100  acres  near 
Johannesburg   for   establishing  an  ashram.   Kallenbach   had  
previously spent time in a Trappist monastery, and he was to pass 
on  to  the Indian some of the skills he learnt  there,  such  as 
shoe-making  and  carpentry. Their friendship  continued  for  35 
years, to be ended only by the German's death. A separate  volume 
in  the  Collected Works reproduces the 250  letters  written  by 
Gandhi to him.

Much later, in the 1930s, Gandhi had a brief correspondence  with 
a  German  Protestant  priest  named  Dietrich  Bonhoeffer.   The 
National  Socialists  had  just come  to  power,  and  Bonhoeffer 
thought  of  organising non-violent resistance against  them.  He 
wrote  to  Gandhi,  asking that he come to India  and  learn  the 
techniques  of satyagraha. The Mahatma invited him over,  but  in 
the  end Bonhoeffer decided to work among radical  Christians  in 
the United States. By the time he returned to Germany it was  too 
late to dislodge the Nazis by non-violent means. Bonhoeffer,  who 
was  a man of much character and charisma, met a tragic end  when 
he  was  executed  in  1944 for his part  in  a  failed  plot  to 
assassinate  Hitler. What, one wonders, would have been the  fate 
of  a  satyagraha  campaign against the Nazis led  by  a  Gandhi-
trained Bonhoeffer in 1933 or 1934?

Hermann  Kallenbach  finds  an honourable  place  in  the  Gandhi 
biographies.  Dietrich Bonhoeffer's connection to the Mahatma  is 
little-known,  although his final sacrifice is warmly  remembered 
in his country. But I now wish to write of a German unhonoured in 
his land and ours, who was withal a close associate and  disciple 
of  Gandhi. His name is Herbert Fischer, and he lives a  life  of 
dignified retirement in Berlin. For a couple of years in the mid-
1930s,  Fischer was part of Gandhi's inner circle. He worked  for 
the  All  India  Village Industries Association  (AIVIA),  a  key 
Gandhian  institution, and saw or talked to the Mahatma at  least 
once or twice a week.

As a young man in Nazi Germany, Herbert Fischer read about Gandhi 
in  a  magazine called Tao, published in  Switzerland  by  Werner 
Zimmermann. Zimmermann was an admirer of Tagore and generally  of 
things  Indian,  whose  journal  carried  news  of  our  national 
movement. Fischer was already oriented towards vegetarianism  and 
organic farming, and from what he read in Tao, the Mahatma seemed 
to  combine the simple life with anti-authoritarian politics.  In 
1935  he  wrote a letter addressed to  "Mahatma  Gandhi,  India", 
asking  to  be  allowed  to work with him.  A  reply  came  back, 
explaining  the  harsh  ashram regimen, and adding  that  he  was 
welcome if he could abide by it.

When  Fischer finally arrived in Sevagram, late in  1936,  Gandhi 
was  not at home. He had left with his entourage for  the  annual 
Congress  meeting, being held at Faizpur, in the Khandesh  region 
of  Maharashtra. The German found his own way to Faizpur,  to  be 
greeted by Gandhi with the words, "So you have come." He did  not 
speak  more,  but  told Fischer to report  to  J.  C.  Kumarappa, 
General Secretary of the AIVIA. This was the first Congress  ever 
held in a village, to mark which the Gandhians had set up a Khadi 
and  Village Industries exhibition. Fischer worked here  by  day,  
and stayed in the dormitories by night. Somewhere in-between, his 
jacket  was stolen, his passport and papers with it.  The  German 
Consulate  in Bombay said they would give him a new  passport  on 
condition he returned to his country and joined the military.  He 
refused, returning to Wardha instead.

For   the  next  year-and-a-half,  Fischer  worked  with   AIVIA, 
focussing  on  the  problem  of  rural  co-operation.  From   the 
beginning,  he  was  treated not as a visitor  but  a  co-worker. 
Certainly the colonial police saw him as such, for in a report on 
Fischer  they noted that "he is a regular wearer of khadi".  When 
he  could, he cycled the seven miles from Maganwadi, the  AIVIA's 
headquarters,  to Gandhi's ashram in Sevagram. There he  and  his 
master  had friendly arguments. Gandhi, ever the attentive  host, 
ordered  that Fischer be served an egg a day, which  he  believed 
necessary  for the European body. The visitor  demurred,  arguing 
that  even cold-blooded Germans could remain vegetarian.  A  more 
weighty  disagreement was political. Gandhi thought that  Fischer 
should return home and commence a satyagraha campaign against the 
Nazis. The German answered that Hitler "was not Judge Broomfield" 
(the  English  judge who had called Gandhi a  great  saint  while 
being  forced  to sentence him. Although they  disagreed  on  the 
universal  efficacy of non-violence, Gandhi never forced  Fischer 
to  go back to Germany. However, in 1938 he asked him to move  to 
Itarsi,  in Madhya Pradesh, to begin work among hand-weavers.  It 
was here that Fischer met his wife, a Jamaican nurse working in a 
mission hospital. Itarsi was a major railway junction, the  place 
where  one  changed  trains when  travelling  from  Allahabad  to 
Wardha.  It  was  thus  Fischer's  privilege  to  take  care   of 
Jawaharlal  Nehru while he went to or returned from  meetings  of 
the  Congress High Command. Nehru would not wait in the  "waiting 
room":  rather,  he would command the German to take  him  for  a 
contemplative walk in a nearby forest.

On September 4, 1939, Great Britain was finally, and  officially, 
at war with the Nazis. All "enemy aliens" were rounded up by  the 
Raj,  including our white-skinned, German-born Gandhian  opponent 
of  Hitler. For the duration of the war, Fischer, his  wife,  and 
their  baby  son  circulated among various  internment  camps  in 
central India. From Jabalpur, they were moved to Ahmednagar, then 
to  Deolali,  and finally to Purandar. This last was  a  "parole" 
camp,  with no barbed wire, and with internees allowed  to  cycle 
the  25  miles  to  Poona,  on  condition  they  returned  before 
nightfall. Fischer used the unprecedented liberty to commute  the 
Gandhian  way  to the library of the Servants of  India  Society. 
Based  principally on his research there, he was to write a  book 
on agricultural co-operation.

During the war, Gandhi wrote several times to the Viceroy, asking 
for the release of the Fischers. They were eventually set free in 
June 1946, a full 12 months after the cessation of hostilities in 
Europe.   Gandhi  now  wrote  to  George  Abell,  the   Viceroy's 
Secretary, asking that Fischer be allowed to visit him. The  next 
month  the  German  family made their way to  the  hill  town  of 
Panchgani,  to  see  Gandhi.  They  had  a  long  and   emotional  
conversation,  and  before they left, the Mahatma had  typed  and 
signed  this  personal  testimonial: "I have  known  Mr.  Herbert 
Fischer  and his wife for a long time. Mr. Fischer was  for  some 
time  in  the  Village  Industries  section  of  my  constructive 
activities.  The  Fischers  belong to the  Quaker  Settlement  at 
Itarsi.  They  are  a simple god-fearing  family  and  lovers  of 
humanity."

Fischer  now felt that the time had come for him to return  home, 
to  help rebuild a destroyed but de-Nazified Germany. His  native 
area  of Saxony lay near the Czech border, in the eastern  sector 
of  a now divided land. Although no Communist, Fischer  respected 
the  Reds  for  having been in the  vanguard  of  the  resistance 
against Hitler. He worked for some years in rural reconstruction, 
and   in  the  early  1950s  was  posted  as  the   DDR's   Trade 
Representative  in  New Delhi. He and his wife  travelled  around 
India meeting, once more, J. C. Kumarappa and other Gandhians. To 
his  sorrow, Jawaharlal Nehru kept his distance, perhaps  out  of 
fear  of  offending the richer and more  powerful  West  Germans. 
Later,  in the 1970s, Herbert Fischer returned to India  as  East 
Germany's first full-fledged Ambassador to our country.

Much  of  what I have related here I learnt  when  I  interviewed 
Herbert Fischer in his apartment a couple of years ago. It was  a 
cold and wet day, and although his directions were precise I  was 
defeated  by  the  Berlin transport system and  my  own  lack  of 
German.  Somewhere  I  took a wrong train,  and  then  the  wrong 
overbridge.  When  I finally reached his home he relieved  of  my 
jacket, set it to dry on a heater, and gave me a coat of his own. 
He  was tall and erect, an old man of soft movements and a  quiet 
grace. We spoke, over cups of Indian tea, of his days with Gandhi 
but also of the troubled unification of his native Germany.

Previously I had only Fischer's spoken words to go by, but I have 
now  obtained  a  copy of an extended essay written  by  him  and 
published  by the Gandhi Informations Zentrum in Berlin. This  is 
called Mahatma Gandhi personlich erlebt (Mahatma Gandhi, as  seen 
in person). I do not read German, but fortunately my father does. 
It is on his translation of the original work that the  following 
paragraphs are based.

Herbert  Fischer's  essay combines close observation  with  sharp 
analysis.  It gives, as no other work I have seen, a  vivid  feel 
for the annual Congress session as held in that party's pomp: the 
"huts  erected  from  light  bamboo mats  on  bare  fields,"  the 
"discussions [which] took place in the open on a raised platform" 
such that "everyone could hear what the leaders said," and, above 
all,  the  magnificent  presence  of  the  Mahatma:  "After   the 
sessions,  during  the meals and at other  functions,  there  was 
always  a  great  rush. A path for Gandhi  could  be  found  with 
difficulty. Everyone wanted to see him from near, or touch him. A 
man threw himself on the floor to touch his feet, even though  he 
was  in danger of being trampled upon by the crowd. Such  worship 
of a living man I had not so far seen. I had to think back to the 
New Testament for a similar instance." 

Fischer  also offers a sketch, rich in quotidian detail,  of  the 
Gandhian Ashram built by J. C. Kumarappa in Maganwadi. "It had  a 
few solid buildings and a number of huts whose walls were made of 
bamboo mats coated with clay and cowdung.... after some time,  I 
got  a hut about two-and-half metres by two-and-a-half metres  in 
dimension.  It had no window as the outer wall  was  half-a-metre 
below  the  roof,  this allowing light and air  into  my  'room'. 
Instead of a cupboard, there was a cord drawn from one end of the 
room  to the other, where I could hang my belongings.  The  floor 
consisted of earth covered with cowdung. This made it firm,  warm 
in  the cold season, [and] termite proof... Each week the  person 
in the hut had to replace the cowdung."

On Sunday, their day of rest, the workers at Maganwadi would walk 
or  cycle over to Sevagram. Fischer clearly studied  Gandhi  with 
attention and fascination, for he provides an indelible  portrait 
of his room and routine. Thus after early morning prayers and the 
obligatory  walk, the Mahatma "withdrew to a corner of his  room, 
the only one in the house which was surrounded on all sides by  a 
two  metre wide verandah. The long sides each had two doors,  the 
others  one apiece. All six doors were always open and there  was 
continuous  coming and going. The other corners were  also  used. 
When I once came in, I saw a young man reading aloud from Nehru's 
autobiography, which had just been published. In another  corner, 
a  beginner was playing a musical instrument. Gandhi's wife  came 
in from time to time to fetch a lid or a cooking vessel. All this 
did not distract him.. He sat on the floor on a grass mat covered 
with  a  khadi sheet, with a white cushion at the  back.  On  his 
thigh,  he held a board which served as writing support. Next  to 
him  was a desk barely half-a-metre high, in which he kept  paper 
and  writing material. If his secretary or a visitor  came,  they 
sat before him. To save time he shaved while talking -  naturally 
without  a  mirror  - or he did his spinning.  Only  during  very 
important   conversations  did  he  content  himself  with   just 
listening and speaking."

Gandhi,  writes  Fischer, was addicted to argument. "For  him,  a 
requirement  was  debate with those of  different  opinion.  This 
helped him to check his own train of thought." Fischer likens him 
to  a chess player. "As a chess player considers in  advance  the 
opponent's  next  move  and his own, so it appeared  to  me  that 
Gandhi  made his move with reference to the expected  answer.  He 
did not play chess or other games for passing time, for time  was 
too  precious  for  him and life itself  offered  an  interesting 
pastime!" He presents Gandhi's thought as constantly evolving and 
adapting.  As  he says with regard to the Mahatma's  decision  to 
kill a poisonous snake in the ashram, "he did not bind himself in 
literal  interpretations [in this case, of ahimsa],  but  decided 
each  situation  on  humanitarian  grounds."  Gandhi  was   often 
reproached  for being inconsistent but, as Fischer sagely  notes, 
"there  was  consistency in his inconsistency, as his  words  and 
actions  were determined by the prevailing conditions." In  other 
words, he changed his mind as the facts themselves changed.

Herbert  Fischer's 33 page pamphlet on Mahatma Gandhi  is  chock-
full of information and insight. We learn here why Gandhi wore  a 
watch despite his stated opposition to industrial technology, and 
why he came to drink goat's milk. We get a first-hand account  of 
why  he  attracted  so many talented disciples:  as  an  American 
missionary quoted here said, Gandhi "seems to me a mixture of  my 
own father and Jesus Christ." Fischer remarks upon the importance 
of women in Gandhi's thought and political practice. There is  an 
intimation  of his precociousness as a conservationist  ("to  eat 
more  and need more, to Gandhi was theft"). All in  all,  Mahatma 
Gandhi  personlich erlebt is almost unique in the literature  for 
its  mixture  of authentic experience and historical  wisdom.  It 
must  be made available in English, and in Indian languages  too. 
In  other  times  the Central Government might  have  funded  the 
translation  itself.  Not  now, however,  now  when  (as  Herbert 
Fischer  sorrowfully writes) "extreme right wing  Hindus  worship 
Gandhi's  murder  and  his murderer.  How  frightening  that  the 
"Father of the Nation" can be so disgraced [by] his own country's 
worship of force...." 
