
Poet with his feet on the ground 


Regarded  as  skilful  in using thecomplexities  of  imagery  and 
symbolism  in  poetry,  Dr. S. Abdul  Rahman  comes  across  very 
straight in his views. ``It is mainly due to our deficiency  that 
Tamil  poetry  has  not  been accorded  the  importance  that  it 
deserves at the national level. We have failed to project to  the 
outside  world  the unique aspects of our poetry'', he  tells  T. 
Ramakrishnan in an hour long free-wheeling discussion.

ABDUL RAHMAN

DR. RAHMAN talks of the new trends in Tamil poetry, the space for 
film  lyricists in the literary world and the relevance of  Vedas 
and Upanishads vis-a-vis poetry.

The announcement of the 1999 Sahitya Akademi award for the  Tamil 
poet and scholar, Dr. Rahman (62), must have been a poetic  irony 
for him as he has been severe in criticising the Akademi for  not 
choosing poets for the award. 

``While the poets of other languages have been regularly  getting 
the Akademi award, it is only in the case of Tamil that they have 
been ignored for so long. 

This is part of a sustained campaign in certain quarters here  to 
suppress  the  role  of poets'', he says.  Dr.  Rahman  has  been 
selected for a collection of poems, `Aalapanai', and it is  after 
a  gap  of  three decades that a work of Tamil  poetry  has  been 
chosen. 

An author of nearly two dozen books, the poet points out that the 
readership  for  poems in Tamil has gone up  manifold  in  recent 
years  and the reason for this is the change in the  approach  of 
dailies and popularly- read magazines. 

Not  only  are a large volume of works created  and  considerable 
amount  of  space  devoted to poetry  in  the  mainstream  Press, 
journals  seek the works of those poets, who have otherwise  been 
contributing to ``little magazines''. 

However,  this carries its own disadvantage. When the  production 
is  more,  the  standards fall. ``But, this  is  not  an  unusual 
feature.  There  have always been best and worst  poetry  in  co-
existence''. 

It  is true that the Indian or Tamil society has not  experienced 
the  level  of massive destruction, which the  Western  countries 
witnessed  in  the last century, and because of  this  and  other 
developments,  their poetry has undergone several stages  in  its 
growth. 

``Still,  there  is a growing realisation among  our  poets  that  
their  personal  experiences should be reflected  more  in  their 
works''.

Calling  himself a neo-classicist, Dr. Rahman, who worked as  the 
Head  of Tamil Department of Islamiah College in Vaniyambadi  for 
several years, says these days, he devotes time to read the Vedas 
and Upanishads, whose literary value is immense. 

``By  going  through  them,  I acquire  greater  clarity  and  my 
thinking  process gets refreshed. And many of my expressions  and 
symbols are taken from them''.

Recipient  of  several  awards  and honours  such  as  the  State 
Government's `Kalaimamani' title (1989), and `Agni Akshara' Award 
(1992),  the seasoned writer contends that film lyrics  are  also 
one   form   of  poetry.  ``Though  Kannadasan   published   many 
collections of poems, the best pieces are his film songs''.  But, 
the lyricists have got limited freedom over their own works.

To  recognise  the contribution of Tamil poets,  Dr.  Rahman  has 
instituted a prize. The first person to receive this prize is the 
Chief Minister Mr. M. Karunanidhi, in Vaniyambadi on January  29. 
According  to him, Mr. Karunanidhi is a pioneer in  adopting  the 
form of poetic prose and has played a unique role in popularising 
poetry. 

One of Dr. Rahman's poems ``Pyramids in the Desert'' goes thus:

The leaders also die
like all of us
But, the leaders' death alone
becomes irreparable loss
Still, the thrones
are not kept vacant.
