
Battle for the Republic


The 50th year of the Republic is a point in history when there is 
need  to recapitulate its achievements and failures. KAMAL  MITRA 
CHENOY sounds a word of caution. 

THE 50th year of the republic has been eventful, but not  cheery. 
The National Democratic Alliance (NDA) regime that was basking in 
the  Kargil victory bungled in Kandahar. The workers are  on  the 
streets  fighting privatisation and the profligate sale  of  long 
hoarded  public  sector assets. Though the port  strike  and  the 
power  strike in Uttar Pradesh are over, more dissent appears  in 
the   offing.  In  the  prevailing  neo-liberal  orthodoxy,   the 
republic's  past  has  been  largely  negative:  a   bureaucratic 
socialist order which stifled individual initiative and led to  a 
high-cost,   low  efficiency  economy.  Even  the   once   lauded 
Constitution has come in for flak in this revisionist reading  of 
the  republic's history. Thus the NDA's demand for  its  thorough 
review.

Now it is time to recall Ambedkar's prophetic warning on the  eve 
of  the finalisation of the Constitution.  That  notwithstanding, 
the   guarantee  of  political  equality,  social  and   economic 
inequalities   which  were  not  addressed  could  lead  to   the 
underprivileged blowing up the laboriously wrought constitutional 
edifice.  Contrary  to  his  apprehensions,  the  threat  to  the 
Constitution comes not from the poor but from the affluent. It is 
not the working poor, but the privileged rich who want to  secede 
from the old republic; to build up a brave new world based on the 
"Washington consensus".

This  then  is a point in our history when we  must  protect  our 
republic's   notable,  indeed  exceptional  past,   despite   its 
spectacular  failures, from a facile and  motivated  revisionism. 
Nowhere in the world has such a republic survived half a  century 
to  such a democratic present. Neither the once-touted  Brazilian 
miracle  nor  the  Asian  Tigers  have  delivered  such  resilent 
democracy  or  economic stability. Neither has so  empowered  the 
poor,  nor  given  rise to such a burgeoning  middle  class.  But 
paradoxically,  the same middle class produced by  the  Nehruvian 
mixed  economy and secular politics is now seduced  by  Fund-Bank 
nostrums  and  the siren song of Hindutva. Strident  upper  caste 
rhetoric   against  casteism  glosses  over  the   1,000-year-old 
Manuvadi  oppression of the Backward Classes and  the  republic's 
unparalleled,  though  still incomplete,  record  of  affirmative 
action,  as Other Backward Class patriarchs sabotage the  Women's 
Reservation Bill in the name of social justice.

People, including intellectuals, prompted by a neo-liberal  media 
have  forgotten  how  a flood of  reports  including  the  Hazari 
Report,  Mahalanobis  Committee, Monopolies  Inquiry  Commission, 
Industrial   Licensing  Policy  Inquiry  Committee   and   Sachar 
Committee  documented the exponential growth of both  Indian  and  
foreign big business as a consequence of the license-permit-quota 
raj.   Contrary   to   current   mainstream   criticism,    large 
entrepreneurs  actually  flourished.  Prominent  economists  have 
showed  how growth rates in the Nehruvian period were  much  more 
stable and impressive than those consequent on the liberalisation 
of  the 1980s onwards. In the earlier period, the enclave  nature 
of  the industrialisation of the colonial period  was  superseded 
and  a  heavy industrial sector  built,  massive  infrastructural 
investments  made, zamindari abolished and a  vigorous  universal 
suffrage-based democracy established. A still unparalleled record 
for any Third World country.

What  must also be remembered and lauded is the relative  success 
of   the  secular  experiment,  after  the  horrendous   communal 
conflagration  of  the  Partition and the  assassination  of  the 
Mahatma by Hindutva zealots. The most multi-lingual country moved 
both  towards  linguistic States and linguistic  federalism  with 
constant  but  substantial  accretions to the  list  of  official 
languages  in  the  Eighth Schedule.  But  this  secular,  multi-
cultural  fabric is now under sustained assault.  The  continuing 
attacks  on  the tiny Christian community as well  as  the  Hindu 
Kabirpanthis  in Jammu, coupled with strident  Hindutva  rhetoric 
along with the sustained infiltration of Sangh Parivar  activists 
into State institutions, especially in the educational and  media 
sectors,  threaten  the republic and its future. The  NDA  regime 
sponsored  attempt  to  rewrite  both  Indian  history  and   the 
Constitution is part of the same communal project to convert  the 
republic  into  an  authoritarian,  upper  caste  neo-Brahminical 
Hindutva state.

The  current battles, therefore, between the divided  secularists 
and  the consolidated Hindutva parivar - the Sangh Parivar,  Shiv 
Sena,  Ananda Marg combine, constitute a battle for the  soul  of 
the  republic. Thus the need to recapitulate the republic's  real 
history  and major successes that both Hindutva  and  neo-liberal 
ideologues seek to suppress and distort. Central to this task  is 
the defence of the Constitution. Despite near 80 amendments,  the 
basic  structure  of  this unique framework  has  guaranteed  and 
protected the most robust and largest democracy in the world. The 
degeneration   of  political  parties,  the  criminalisation   of 
politics  and the venality of the ruling elites, have nothing  at 
all to do with the Constitution as it has evolved. And evolved it 
has  through  successive  and major  amendments,  reflecting  the 
socio-political  demands of the time. Thus the Vajpayee  regime's 
claim,   dutifully   parroted  by  some  publicists,   that   the 
Constitution is dated willfully ignores this reality in order  to 
subserve an authoritarian communal agenda.

A  country  that  loses  its historical  memory  loses  both  its 
democracy  and sovereignty. Thus the assaults by  a  Hindutva-led 
regime  which  has abjectly surrendered its  sovereignty  to  the 
World  Trade  Organisation, must be resolutely  rebuffed  if  the 
republic is to survive. 

The  author is Associate Professor of Political Science  at  JNU,  
New Delhi.
