
A small beginning


Hope  seems hopeless when Duchenne muscular dystrophy  strikes  a 
child.  With  little or no access to information,  appliances  or 
facilities, parents face a terrible time watching their  children 
die  a slow death. KAUSALYA SANTHANAM writes of an effort to  set 
up a support group in Chennai.

WHEN  Manoj  was  born, his parents had no inkling  what  was  in 
store. He seemed a normal child in every way. His milestones were 
slightly delayed but they thought he would soon catch up. At  the 
age of three, when he couldn't climb stairs or jump, they  became 
rather anxious. Then began a round of doctor shopping that took a 
heavy toll of their finances and well-being.

It  was only when Manoj was seven that they learnt that he was  a 
victim   of   Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy  (DMD),   a   genetic 
progressive muscular disorder that has no cure and is lethal; the 
victim does not generally live beyond the age of 20.

By  then  it was too late for they had already had  their  second 
child,  again a son. The nightmare played out once more but  this 
time  they knew the dreaded signs. The diagnosis was  agonisingly 
the same.

Today,  the brave couple struggles to cope with the physical  and 
emotional  trauma of caring for two children, both of  whom  will 
need their help all the time, from the moment of waking till they 
are settled in bed.

Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy leads to the gradual weakening of the 
muscles.  Parents and relatives watch helpless and distraught  as 
the  victim moves from the ambulant to the semi-ambulant  to  the 
bed-ridden stage.

The  Thirukumarans are twice unlucky. But there  are  innumerable 
couples  facing  the  grim prospect of caring  for  DMD  children 
throughout  the country. There are more than 60,000 cases of  DMD 
in India with 3,000 new cases being diagnosed each year.

The  Kanchi  Kamakoti Child's Trust Hospital in  Chennai  (KKCTH) 
will  begin a Muscular Dystrophy support group on February 5.  It 
will  be inaugurated at the Asan Memorial School, Anderson  Road. 
The  meeting  is  being organised by  the  KKCTHand  Rotary  Club 
(Madras South). On the agenda figure talks on the advantages of a 
self-help  group,  on the rights and benefits  the  disabled  are 
eligible   for,  a  first  person  account  of  triumphing   over 
disability  and a parent's viewpoint. An entertainment  programme 
will be held for the children. "The KKCTH will provide space  for 
the  meetings and streamline funds received. It will help in  any 
way  it  can," says (Retd) Wing Commander,  V.  Ramadurai,  Hony. 
Chief Administrator of the hospital.

The formation of this group has been initiated by the efforts  of 
Dr.  Kalpana  Gowrishankar,  Consultant  geneticist  and  Dr.  V. 
Viswanathan,  paediatric  neurologist  at  the  KKCTH.  Both  Dr. 
Kalpana  and Dr. Viswanathan were thinking seriously in terms  of 
starting such a group for the past two years. Dr. Viswanathan who 
had spent many years in the U.K. working in Children's  Hospitals 
in Manchester and Dublin found such groups there of great help to 
the  parents  and relatives who drew psychological  and  physical 
strength  from them, both in sharing problems and gaining  access 
to  knowledge and facilities. "In England, I would see  three  or 
four cases of DMD in a year whereas here I've seen 22 children in 
just  two years, says Dr Viswanathan. The quality of life  is  so 
much  better  for these children in the  West.  Battery  operated 
wheelchairs   give  them  a  feeling  of  independence  and   the 
environment  is  geared  towards their needs.  Here,  the  multi-
location of facilities makes life difficult for the patients  and 
their  care  providers.  We don't have  a  multidisciplinary  DMD 
clinic at Chennai. There is no one to advise the parent and  pre-
natal diagnosis which can help couples plan their families is not 
freely available. 

Dr.  Kalpana  knew  the value of  such  support  from  first-hand 
experience  when her husband underwent heart surgery in the  U.S. 
in the Eighties. Says Dr. Kalpana, "Though the children are  born 
normal, the muscles weaken. When they crawl, they trip. They  are 
clumsy  and  can't  climb stairs. First  it  affects  the  pelvic 
muscles,  followed by hand and leg muscles and then those of  the 
heart."

The  visit of a German doctor to the Child's Trust Hospital  gave 
impetus   to  the  idea  and  saw  it  crystallise.  Dr.   Gunter 
Scheuerbrandt,  a Rotarian with a quarter century  experience  in 
dealing with Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy patients, on his  return 
to Germany followed up his offer of assisting the project.

The  Rotary Club (Madras South) which had arranged for the  visit 
of the doctor to the hospital, chipped in. Plans are on the anvil 
to  set  up  a DNA testing laboratory at the  KKCTH.  "Since  the 
project will cost Rs. 1.3 crores, we are trying to obtain the  3H 
-   hunger,   humanity   and   health-grant   from   the   Rotary 
International," says V. R. Anil Kumar, member and past  president 
of the Club.

"There  are  just  a few centres in India  where  DNA  diagnostic 
testing  is available. Right now the diagnosis in most  hospitals 
is  based  on  clinical  diagnosis.  DNA  testing  gives  instant 
definitive  diagnosis based on two tests - the dystrophin  muscle 
stain  and  the  molecular diagnosis,"  says  Dr.  G.  Kumaresan, 
Professor  of  Paediatric Neurology, Institute of  Child  Health, 
Egmore.

In  India  hardly any counselling facility is available  and  the 
doctor  has to double up as counsellor as well, say the  doctors. 
There  is lack of public awareness. Schools seldom offer  special 
facilities  to  these children though they are quite  bright  and  
they are excluded from normal activities.

The  Group  will  help  in exchange  of  information  and  update 
regarding  research  and  methods of treatment  and  will  remove 
misconceptions.

The difficulties faced by uninformed parents and relatives in the 
deprived  groups  are  heart rending. With no  access  to  funds, 
appliances,  information  or  facilities, theirs  is  a  terrible 
plight.  Transporting  the  children  to  city  hospitals  is   a 
herculean  task  by itself. In the absence  of  wheelchairs,  the 
child  has  to  be carried. More often than not,  the  mother  is 
blamed  for  giving birth to such children and  deserted  by  the 
husband. Many parents sink into apathy when they know that it  is 
a fatal illness.

"The  meeting  on  February 5 is just a  small  beginning  to  an 
ambitious  programme",  says  Dr. Kumaresan. It is  a  step  that 
promises to provide a better quality of life to thousands who for 
no  fault  of  theirs have been given a raw deal  by  Fate  while 
shuffling the gene cards. 
