
Trees that flower always


MANY trees here flower in summer, but there are a few that do  so 
in the cooler months. Some trees are in flower almost always.

"Puvarasu" Thespesia populnea (Family: Malvaceae) is a tree found 
along  the seashore but is now found all over. It  has  Hibiscus-
like yellow flowers with maroon and purple spots inside. The tree 
blooms  always  except  perhaps for some time  during  the  rainy 
season.  The  tree  looks best after the  rains  when  clean  and 
bedecked with flowers.

"Manja  Arali"  Yellow  Oleander  Cascabela  thevetia   (Thevetia 
peruviana) of the family Apocynaceas is a member from Central and 
South  America.  It is a tall shrub or a small  tree  that  bears 
golden  yellow funnel shaped flowers. All parts secrete  a  milky 
sap (latex) which is poisonous.

"Manja  Arali"  is  generally  grown  as  a  border/fence  plant. 
Gardeners  feel  that it requires too much water. It  is  drought 
resistant and easy to grow, propagated through seeds.

The  plant  is  always in flower and the ground  below  it  often 
carpeted  with  flowers. In spite of its good looks it is  not  a 
good idea growing it in schools and near playgrounds.

Cordia sebestena (Family: Boraginaceae) is a small tree from West 
Indies often planted in our gardens. It bears bunches of  orange-
scarlet flowers. Easily raised from fresh seeds the tree is found 
to be in flower always.

The  way  Guazuma ulmifolia (Family:  Sterculiaceae)  grows  here 
prolifically  may make one believe that it is a native tree.  But 
it is another introduced tree from tropical America.

Guazuma ulmifolia bears bunches of small cream coloured  flowers. 
It will be found to bear flowers on and off throughout the year.

Solanum macranthum, the large flowered Potato Tree from Brazil is 
sometimes seen in gardens in Chennai. It is the only plant in the 
tomato-potato-brinjal family Solanaceae that grows to the size of 
a large shrub or small tree. The tree is prickly. The leaves  are 
large  and  deeply lobed. The corollas are  bluish  violet  which 
become pale with age while the anthers are large and yellow.

Solanum  macranthum  grows  best in a spot  that  has  shade.  It 
flowers throughout the year.

The  Temple  Tree  bursts into flower in spring. It  has  a  long 
period  of flowering. In this genus, the white flowered  Plumeria 
alba is found to flower always while other species may flower  in 
the "off-season".

Flowering trees can be classified into two major groups -  summer 
flowering  and  winter  flowering.  A  third  and  smaller  group 
comprises  those that are perpetually in bloom. The trees  listed 
here come under this group. 

O. T. RAVINDRAN
