
Making women disappear


FIFTEEN  days after the mock millennium mania died down,  another 
mania  gripped  the  media. In the city of Pune,  known  for  its 
culture and literature, a pageant was staged. The newspaper  that 
sponsored  the  pageant reported thus:  "Amidst  the  spectacular 
space  age  sets,  India's  hopes for  future  conquests  in  the 
international  arena were born". Conquer what? Conquer how?  Such 
precise  questions  should not be asked. Why carp  about  details 
when it is time to celebrate. 

On  the  day that the "born winners" were featured on  the  front 
page - three identical smiles under crystal crowns - there was  a 
page  one  anchor story with the headline: "Meri eyes  bhi  sexy, 
mera  pout bhi sexy". It was an item about a net poll being  held 
to  select the sexist women of the last century. Among the  names 
offered for the choice were three Gandhi women, Indira, Sonia and 
Priyanka,  as well as Jayalalitha! The results, apparently,  will 
be  announced on February 14, Valentine's Day. Not  surprisingly, 
the next day the Congress(I) demonstrated in front of the  office 
of  the  newspaper,  objecting  to  the  "denigration"  of  their 
respected  leaders.  I  do not know whether the  All  India  Anna 
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) did the same in Chennai. 

What is extraordinary about this fixation with beauty and sex  is 
that it hides the most pressing reality that rich and poor  women 
face  in  India  today - increasing  violence,  both  within  and 
outside  the  home.  You  rarely hear  the  full  story  of  this 
violence. It comes in the form of small news items. But when  you 
string these together, you realise how the changes in the economy 
that  are  integrating  India into the global  economy  are  also 
exposing women to many more forms of violence and assault.

Thus,  for instance, even as women are able to enter  professions 
hitherto  closed  to  them,  they  have  to  contend  with  their 
vulnerability in a society that considers women out in the public 
space  as  fair  game. On the day that the front  pages  of  some 
newspapers  carried news of the three beauty queens,a small  item 
inside  spoke of how women bus conductors in Andhra Pradesh  were 
being taught karate. Why? Because after the first rush for a  job 
which had earlier been a male domain, women realised that to be a 
bus conductor and a woman meant facing not just abuse and  sexual 
harassment  from male passengers but also molestation and  sexual 
assault. To prepare themselves to fight against this, these women 
had to learn karate. 

And yet again, on the same day as this report appeared, the op-ed 
(opposite  the edit page) page of one newspaper had  an  article, 
prominently displayed, lifted from a British newspaper, with  the 
headline  "Learn to flirt and turn your life around.  "Would  the 
women bus conductors have done better for themselves if they  had 
heeded the totally irrelevant advice in this article?

Violence  is not increasing only outside homes, but even  inside. 
According  to  a study conducted in a fairly prosperous  area  of 
Gujarat, Kheda district,by Leela Visaria and some others, out  of 
346  women interviewed, 66 per cent reported that they  had  been 
subjected to verbal or physical violence in their marital  homes. 
Nearly  42  per  cent said that the violent assault  was  by  the 
husband.  And  23 per cent said that they were  verbally  abused. 
This included threats and taunts. 

What is worse, two out of five women, or 40 per cent, endured the 
violence  without telling anyone else about it. Also,  around  45 
per  cent of the women reported that men abused them verbally  in 
front of the children. 

The  survey  threw  up  some  other  interesting  insights.   For 
instance,  although  the incidence of reported abuse  cut  across 
age,  caste and educational status, it was lower in women  living 
in  joint families than those in nuclear families.  One  possible 
explanation for this could be that women in joint families  might 
have  been more inhibited about mentioning such  incidences  than 
women  in  nuclear families. But the difference  was  substantial 
enough  to  be noted - 20 per cent. Although  the  percentage  of 
verbal  abuse was the same in both groups, more women  living  in 
nuclear  families  reported physical abuse than  those  in  joint 
families. The researchers have concluded from this that  contrary 
to popular belief that women oppress women in joint families,  in 
fact women get some protection from abuse in such social set-ups. 

What  were  the  reasons  for  the  violence?  The  most   common 
explanation in some groups of women was the husband's anger at  a 
meal  not  being  ready in time, or  not  meeting  the  husband's 
tastes.  Other  provocations were the husband's belief  that  the 
women  were  not looking after the children properly.  They  were 
accused  of wasting time gossiping instead of looking  after  the 
home and the family. 

Such  surveys  blow the lid off the belief  that  with  so-called 
"modernisation"  and the opening up of opportunities  for  women, 
life  necessarily  improves. Unless the attitudes of  men  change 
towards  women, there is little prospect of such violence  inside 
or  outside  the  home decreasing in the  near  future.  In  this 
respect, the media is failing on two counts. On the one hand,  it 
has  bought  the glamour and empowerment argument.  Just  because 
young  Indian women can now strut on the stage and  be  applauded 
for  their  manufactured  beauty,  we are  told  that  women  are 
becoming  more confident and stronger. This is an illusory  world 
being projected as the real one. 

Meanwhile  the real world, where women bus conductors must  learn 
karate,where  women in prosperous rural areas must silently  bear 
verbal   and  physical  abuse,  remains  hidden.   It   virtually 
disappears  from  view  because it is  inconvenient.  Instead  of 
reporting  the full story, the media is now reporting  only  that 
which sells, not that which informs. This is not journalism, this 
is public relations, this is advertising.  

You cannot make violence against women disappear by not reporting 
it, you cannot make poverty vanish by not looking at it. 

KALPANA SHARMA
