
Fashion time in Chennai


FASHION  SHOWS may provoke a host of negative reactions, but  the 
annual  Leather Show is something which packs in a little bit  of 
glamour for Chennai all the same.

Coming  up  on  February 1, is the fashion show  that  will  have 
fashion made of animal skins.

And  walking  down the ramp in Chennai will be Miss  World  Yukta 
Mookhey  along  with  a lot of other  top  models  including  the 
winners  of the latest Femina Miss India - 15 female and 10  male 
models  in all. The occasion: The ``Millennium'' Fashion Show  to 
be  held  as  a  part of the  India  International  Leather  fair 
organised  by Council for Leather Exports (CLE) and Indian  Trade 
Promotion Organisation (ITPO) from January 31 to February 4.

Mr. Hemant Trevedi, who had designed the shimmering ice-blue gown 
that  wrapped  Ms.  Yukta Mookhey when she was  on  the  ramp  of 
London's Olympia theatre, will be directing the show.

Mr.  Trevedi's designs here will be of sleek, supple leather  and 
the designer will choreograph the star-studded show with  `multi-
cultural'  and `creative' themes highlighting fads  ranging  from 
`Decorative', `Folkloric', `Vivacious' and `Romantic'.

Chennai's own designer Ms. Rehane Dhala will be chipping in  with 
her garments for the opening sequence and the finale.

It is not going to be just clothes, leather products like  shoes, 
bags,  garments and accessories from all over the world  will  be 
showcased, along with the latest colour trends and styles.

``The  Indian  leather industry accounts for Rs.  7000  crore  of 
exports. This year our target was a 10 per cent growth in  export 
of  footwear. And till October, we have registered a 30 per  cent 
increase  in  footwear  export  market,''  Dr.  Zackria  Sait  of 
Presidency Kid Leather says.

Experts  claim that the `Made-in-India' image has  been  changing 
``positively'' in the last three years. Now, the products are  in 
tune with the requirements of the global market.

From  the low budget CLRI show in '67, the ITPO has come  a  long 
way, in association with Taj Coromandel, which has been the venue 
since '76. This year, there is a big budget event in store.

(By Sudhish Kamath)
