
Hindutva: Time to get rid of the mask


IT is time to get rid of the mask. There is really no longer  any 
need  for it. It is time for the Hindutva lobbyists to  come  out 
and say right out what is in their minds. They are entitled to be 
heard,  along  with  the  rest;  and  can  reasonably  expect   a 
sympathetic hearing.

It is time for them to come right out and say, for example,  that 
not only the Babri Masjid, but, they believe, also the mosques at 
Mathura  and Varanasi must be razed to the ground; only thus  can 
the  past  be amicably buried. It is time for them to  speak  out 
about how precisely they propose to use "courage" to resolve  the 
Kashmir  issue;  for them to speak out in  a  forthright  fashion 
about what they believe needs to be done about cow slaughter  and 
how;  and about Article 370, the uniform civil code,  doing  away 
with the distorted history taught in schools; time to seek inputs 
from  learned  sadhus and sants, into the political  process,  to 
purify  and  energise  our politics,  following  the  example  of 
Bangladesh,  Pakistan  and  Iran.  Make  Sanskrit  the   official 
language,  wreak vengeance on Muslims, put Christians on a  leash 
and have strictly policed dress codes for girls and women. 

The  proponents of Hindutva must no doubt show great  courage  in 
confronting  others.  But  they also urgently  need  to  confront 
themselves;  to critically assess their dreams.  Good  intentions 
alone  are not enough. Once you do a thing, it then  follows  its 
own  logic,  to  reach  the  destination  it  cannot  but  reach; 
regardless  of  your  own  intentions in the  matter.  So  it  is 
introspection that is needed; not only debate. 

This  will  seem childish to many people.  And  outrageous.  What 
right  has some semi-literate fool, a coward to boot, not at  all 
like  Shivaji;  what  right  has such a  person  to  lecture  the 
stalwarts  in the RSS and the VHP. They were not born  yesterday; 
they  have  seen  the world, have,  indeed,  been  sincerely  and 
strenously  engaged  with  it,  for  decades;  they  have  proved 
themselves.  Still, there is a very real danger, one  that  often 
proves fatal for people who keep too much to themselves.

This  realisation  forced itself on me quite suddenly,  one  fine 
day; when I was trying to understand the sad fate of many bright, 
painstaking  and highly committed children who have remained  too 
long  with no one but themselves for company; other  than  people 
who  think  just  like them. Bacche waali baat;  no  doubt.  Just 
childish prattle. But perhaps there is something to be learnt; by 
people who do not think that they can have nothing to learn  from 
a mere child. 

Children below seven literally live in worlds of their own. These 
worlds  may  not  "revolve  around them",  but  they  do  revolve 
according to the laws that children make up for them. That  these 
fantastic  views are able to remain undetected, unchallenged,  in  
areas  where  children  do  not  have  to  act  on  their  faulty 
suppositions, is largely on account of the way language is imbued 
with private, personalised meanings, and therefore cuts  children 
(or grown-ups) off from the real world instead of connecting them 
to it. 

Children  listening  to an adult will freely take words  to  mean 
pretty much what they choose, depending on the context and on the 
child's personal inclinations. Talking to adults, they will  seem 
very  vague,  very  confused  (because they  are  speaking  in  a 
different,  personalised  language); even in speaking  of  things 
that they in fact understand very well. When children below seven 
talk to each other, they in essence talk past each other;  though 
the  speaker  is  sure that he has made himself  clear,  and  the 
listener knows that he has correctly understood what was said.

Thinking  is nourished by, sharpened by, social  contact;  dreams 
"remain  individual  and uncommunicated". Social  experience  may 
indeed flow into dreams; but there is no saying what will  become 
of  it. Thanks to this difference, thinking quickly moves  on  to 
sophisticated concepts, whereas private worlds are still tied  to 
imagery  and  primal perception. The mere  difference,  then,  of 
telling  one's  thoughts  to others, or of  keeping  silence  and 
telling it only to oneself, or only to people who are almost like 
one's  own  self,  makes  a simply  enormous  difference  to  the 
fundamental structure and functioning of thought; to the level of 
its sophistication.

A  child  habituated to visionary or  "romantic"  thinking  faces 
great  difficulty  in  trying to get his ideas  across  to  other 
people; to people who are not exactly like him. Only just now the 
ideas had seemed to him so obvious, so clear, so compelling,  but 
now that he is trying to explain them to someone else, he himself 
finds  his  presentation so unsatisfactory. This is  a  revealing 
indicator  of what the child is missing out on an ongoing  basis, 
an  indicator  of  the kind of low quality  stuff  he  has  grown 
accustomed  to  living  with, feels  comfortable  with,  and  has 
acquired  a taste for. But, of course, confronted by  threatening 
facts, a child, like a social group, might perversely respond  to 
this by trying to withdraw further into itself. 

SUDHANSHU RANADE
