
Wasting away of the muscles


MUSCULAR  Dystrophy is of various types of which the most  common 
and severe is Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. The others are Becker, 
Limb Girdle, facio-scapulo-humeral, myotonic, spinal muscular and 
Chacot-Marie-Tooth  Disease.  These affect muscles of  the  face, 
limbs and spinal cord to varying extents and may not prove fatal.

Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy is caused by the lack of  a  single 
protein  called dystrophin in muscle fibre. A genetic  condition, 
it  affects  only  boys. The disease derives its  name  from  the 
French neurologist Duchenne who first described it in 1861.

The  symptoms generally manifest themselves from the age of  two. 
The progress is rapid and there is no known cure or medication to 
halt or contain its progress.

It  is  transmitted by an altered gene in the x  chromosome.  The 
chromosomes  that  determine  whether an individual  is  male  or 
female are known as sex chromosomes.

Females have a pair of x chromosomes whereas males have only  one 
x  and  one y. Since the defective gene is carried only in  x,  a 
woman  with  DMD gene in one of her two x  chromosomes  will  not 
develop  Duchenne  muscular  dystrophy. But  she  will  become  a 
carrier with 50 per cent of her daughters becoming carriers while 
50  per  cent of her sons will be affected. There is no  male  to 
male transmission of the disease.

The  other type of muscular dystrophy which is also  x-linked  is 
Becker. But it has a later onset and is less severe.

New mutations may account for one-third of cases. In cases  where 
a male child is affected with DMD due to a new mutation, there is 
only a small risk to future offspring.

Research:

Since DMD is the result of the lack of the protein dystrophin  in 
the  muscle fibre, gene therapy or restitution of  dystrophin  by 
means of this technique has been tried but has met with a  number 
of hurdles.

Utrophin  therapy  is  also being tried.  Utrophin,  a  naturally 
occurring  protein can be a promising substitute  for  dystrophin 
because  its  DNA and protein sequences are similar to  those  of 
dystrophin  and  it  can  replace the  function  of  the  missing 
dystrophin  protein in DMD patients. This is currently  the  most 
promising  approach  according  to  doctors.  The  other  methods 
include  in-vitro  recombitant DNA manipulation  and  fibre-blast 
transfer. In some patients, steroids have helped in slowing  down 
the progress of the disease.
