
Fighting pollution


EACH  winter,  North India reels under cold, fog  and  pollution. 
Driving  after  sunset  in the bigger  cities,  choc-a-bloc  with 
trucks,  buses, a never-ending line of cars and two wheelers,  is 
fast  becoming  a nightmare. Despite claims made by  the  Central 
Pollution  Control  Board  (CPCB) that  pollution  in  Delhi  has 
reduced  because of various preventive measures, it is  difficult 
to accept these claims. 

Acrid  diesel and petrol fumes assault your senses and make  your 
eyes smart. In the thick smog it is difficult to see more than  a 
few  feet ahead. Meanwhile there is a long line of patients  with 
respiratory ailments waiting outside clinics.

Everyone  is concerned about the high levels of pollution and  an 
increasing number of asthma patients. The roads are choking  with 
traffic  and there is no space for expansion. But the  government 
continues to encourage car manufacturers. A dozen new models  are 
to  hit our already overcrowded streets. In fact a market  driven 
economy, blindly promoting car manufacture militates against  the 
needs  of conservation and the growth of cities in a manner  that 
enables  people to breathe freely and safely. Pedestrians,  those 
driving  two-wheelers  and  even policemen can  be  seen  wearing 
masks.

Though  a package of measures for improving air quality is  being 
discussed, no one is questioning the policy that enables so  many 
new  models  of cars. There are 3.3 million vehicles  on  Delhi's 
roads  which  is  more than the number  of  vehicles  in  Mumbai, 
Calcutta and Chennai put together. Nearly 800 vehicles a day were 
registered  in  Delhi in 1999. However, the number of  cycles  in 
Delhi  and other big towns has been steadily declining.  This  is 
because it is no longer safe to cycle to work.

Even talk of a mass transport system - a metro for the capital  - 
has  low  priority.  It may take a decade for  a  mass  transport 
system  to  be operational by which time Delhi's  population  and 
traffic  will have increased phenomenally. In any case  there  is 
not  as  much money to be made on a public  transport  system  as 
there  is  on  a new line of sleek  automobiles.  So  why  should 
bureaucrats and politicians bother?

The  chairman, CPCB, Dr. Dilip Biswas, as a  government  servant, 
cannot  be  critical  of  the  ham-handed  policy  on  automobile 
production.  But he does say that if pollution control has to  be 
tackled  it  has to be this way: "improve  public  transport  and 
discourage private transport".

Here are his answers to questions on pollution control/smog.

How  many of the metros are affected by smog? How does  vehicular 
pollution escalate the problem? 

Fog occurs all over North India - not just the big cities but  in 
all  open  spaces  including  rural areas.  It  occurs  when  the 
atmosphere  is  calm and air and all its constituents  mix  at  a 
comparatively  low level. Fog is not caused by pollution. But  it 
does increase pollution, for pollution-laden air hangs low unable 
to escape.

Some scientists maintain that fog in northern India is  primarily 
because  of  intensive  agriculture (rabi  crop)  in  the  winter 
months.  However,  this has not yet been  confirmed.  The  second 
theory  is  that if there is moisture in the air, it  mixes  with 
dust  particles  making  it more difficult  for  moisture  to  be 
released into the upper strata of the atmosphere.

A few months ago, there were reports that pollution in Delhi  had 
reduced. Is it true? Has pollution increased this winter?

Some  of the major sources of pollution have been  reduced.  This 
includes the phatphaties (World War Two vintage heavy motor bikes 
on which a carriage is mounted) and all 15-year-old vehicles; the 
quality  of petrol has improved with lead being removed  and  the 
introduction of pre-mixed 2T oil for two-stroke scooter  engines. 
There  has been a 97 per cent reduction in lead in the  air.  The 
sulphur  content in diesel supplied to Delhi has also been  going 
down steadily from 1996. However, to attain the Euro-2 norms,  it 
will have to be reduced further.

Though  there  has been a marginal improvement in  terms  of  air 
quality,  on  certain  days due to  "inversion",  pollution  does 
increase.  But  in  Delhi it is less than  it  was  last  winter. 
Pollens  that cause allergies are more common in spring  than  in 
winter.

Is Delhi still the world's fourth most polluted city?

This is no longer true. The World Health Organisation ranking  of 
1985 was of cities with high particulate matter in the air. There 
is high dust level in all our cities, especially in Delhi.

What  is  the  biggest cause of pollution? Is  it  still  due  to 
vehicular pollution?

In  our  cities it is vehicular pollution. But water  quality  is 
also poor and that is due to the high level of municipal waste in 
the  water. Even in the big cities where treated, piped water  is 
supplied,  the  excessive use of bore wells,  booster  pumps  and 
sewage  lines running close to rusted and broken water  pipes  is 
causing water contamination. Enteric diseases are on the rise.

What  about  pollution caused by diesel vehicles?  What  is  more 
serious - diesel or petrol pollution.

I  do  not distinguish between diesel and petrol  pollution.  All 
long  chain  hydrocarbons,  whether diesel  or  petrol,  pollute.  
Diesel  pollution  is  more visible  than  petrol  pollution.  If 
hydrocarbon  fuels  have to be used, it is better  to  use  short 
chain  hydrocarbons like compressed natural gas, propane,  butane 
and  methane.  In diesel vehicles a high degree  of  sulphur  and 
carbon soot is released. Both diesel and petrol vehicles have  to 
observe  Euro standards set for April 2000, where  a  multi-point 
fuel injection system is mandatory.

Is there a strategy to fight pollution in the country?

A  national  programme is on the cards. Mr. J. K.  Nair  heads  a 
committee  to  manage the pollution levels. It has met  seven  or 
eight times and a time-bound plan is being worked out.

However,  pollution control is possible only if we take  care  of 
basic amenities like air and water. Cars have to be standardised. 
Our  roadsides and alleys are full of litter and dirt  that  does 
not seem to bother anyone. So our people need to be disciplined - 
to  have  basic civic sense. While it is true that there  is  the 
tremendous  pressure  of  population  on  our  cities,  it  is  a 
population  that has to be aware of its  civic  responsibilities. 
There are no easy solutions to controlling pollution. 

USHARAI
