
Trim and ambiguous


THE  Broadcasting Bill 2000 which is currently in the making  is, 
at  the  draft  stage,  an  interesting  document.  It  marks   a 
significant  departure  in  approach  from  previous   government 
efforts  at  drafting broadcast legislation.  Historically,  with 
both  the  Prasar Bharati Act and the Broadcasting  Bill  in  its 
earlier avatar - the draft that Mr Jaipal Reddy had introduced in 
Parliament  in  May  1997 - the tendency was to  be  specific  on 
crucial issues such as conditions for giving licences, Direct  To 
Home  (DTH), appointment of the members of the  authority,  cross 
media restrictions and foreign equity.

This  bill  does  the opposite. It provides  for  a  Broadcasting 
Authority  of India, outlines its structure and  basic  functions 
and  leaves  all details to be determined by the rules  that  the 
Government will draft after the passing of the bill. It uses  the 
1997 bill as the basic draft and proceeds to propose dropping  of 
several sub-sections and clauses of this bill so that it ends  up 
being leaner, and far more ambiguous. 

The original broadcasting bill of 1997 provided a schedule at the 
end of the bill which spelt out who was disqualified from holding 
a  licence  (foreigners,  companies with  foreign  equity),  what 
restrictions  there  would  be to prevent  monopolies,  and  what 
restrictions  there  would  be  on  cross  media  interests.  All 
references  to this schedule are proposed to be dropped from  the 
new  bill, and one does not know whether such a schedule will  be 
eventually attached.

There  have  been earlier drafts of this Government's  bill,  and 
whereas  one  of  them  had  put  foreign  equity  permitted   in 
broadcasting at over 70 per cent, the draft that has gone to  the 
Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Mr. Arun Jaitley,  does 
not mention the issue of foreign equity in so many words.

The Minister will now make the changes he deems fit, and then  it 
will  go  to the Law Ministry again. Some bits  of  the  original 
draft  which the bureaucrats of Information and Broadcasting  and 
those  of  the  Ministry of Law have  recommended  dropping  make 
interesting  reading.  It  begins  by  saying  that  the  Central 
Government  will  appoint  the chairperson  of  the  Broadcasting 
Authority  of India. It drops the clauses which specify who  will 
constitute  the  selection  committee:  the  President  and   the 
chairman of the Press Council. Obviously this Government does not 
want to be tied down in this matter.

It provides for a whole-time chairperson, four whole-time members 
and  seven  part-time  members to be  appointed  by  the  Central 
Government. The secretary general will be zselected from a  panel 
of  five officers of the rank of secretary to the  Government  of 
India.

The  latest  draft of the bill says nothing about  setting  up  a 
separate  body to look into complaints but says it is a  function 
of  the authority to receive, consider and decide on  complaints. 
It  proposes  to  drop  two  clauses  detailing  which  kind   of 
complaints.  It  also  proposes  to  drop  five  or  six  clauses 
detailing   which  kinds  of  practices  should  be  avoided   in 
programming.

Three  significant  sub-sections in the original draft  are  ear-
marked  for deletion in the current draft. These related  to  not 
granting  licences  to  foreigners  and  foreign  companies,  not 
granting licences to the same party for more than one category of 
service,  and restrictions on cross-media ownership  between  the 
newspaper and broadcasting services as specified. These  services 
are   terrestrial  radio  broadcasting,  terrestrial   television 
broadcasting,   satellite   radio  broadcasting,   satellite   TV 
broadcasting, DTH broadcasting, local delivery services and  such 
other services as may be prescribed.

In  place  of  these  sub-sections  it  says  that  the   Central 
Government  may,  from time to time by notification  in  official 
gazette, "make rules consistent with this act to ensure diversity 
of  news  and views and prevent monopolies in the  media".  These 
rules  will  provide  for eligibility  and  disqualification  for 
holding   licences,  restrictions  to  prevent  accumulation   of 
interests in licensed services, restrictions on holding  licences 
or  controlling  interest in both broadcasting  and  distribution 
services,  and  restrictions  on controlling  interests  in  both 
newspapers and licensed services. 

This  constitutes  a neat side-stepping of the  more  contentious 
issues in Indian broadcast legislation. Whether or not cable  and 
satellite channel licences can be held by the same party, whether 
newspaper and magazine owners can also have TV or radio  channels 
in  their area of circulation, whether or not  foreign  companies 
can  get  satellite licences, and if so with what  percentage  of 
foreign equity - all this has been left to the discretion of  the 
government  of the day. The lobbying that major private  channels 
and  software  production houses have done with the  Ministry  of 
Information and Broadcasting seems to have paid off. 

We  have to wait and see what Mr Jaitley will add,  subtract  and 
retain,  and  what the law ministry will do  thereafter.  At  the 
moment it is a very accommodating draft. It does not spell out on 
what basis licences will be given: the clause which says licences 
will  be  granted to the highest bidder has  been  earmarked  for 
dropping.  Ditto  the  clause  which says  DTH  services  can  be 
uplinked from India only. 

If  this  draft  goes through, it should make a  lot  of  private 
broadcasters  happy. And if the bill is so harmless as to be  not 
contentious  at  all,  it may well sail through  both  Houses  of 
Parliament.  Thereafter  the Government can put in  the  kind  of 
teeth it wants through the rules, depending on whose interests it 
wants to serve at a given point in time.  

What changes does the draft legislation make to the 1997 Bill  to 
enable  convergence  of communication technologies? It  does  the 
following.  It  amends the definition of  the  term  broadcasting 
services to incorporate the term "electromagnetic", which  pretty 
much  covers Internet, cable and satellite transmission. It  also 
drops  the  qualifier  "television" from the  terms  "cable"  and 
"cable  operator", when talking of a local delivery  service,  so 
that in effect that would allow cable delivered Internet as well. 
The  constant  references to MMDS delivery in the  earlier  bill, 
have  been  dropped. MMDS means a  ground  wireless  transmission 
system. 

The  current  draft proposes to scrap some six or  seven  clauses 
specifying  what  the conditions of the licence  should  be  with 
reference  to  programming  -  all  that  national   integration, 
religious  harmony,  scientific temper, bit. It also  intends  to 
drop a clause suggesting that the licensee should earmark 50  per 
cent  of  the transmission time for  broadcasting  programmes  of 
Indian origin.

With  reference  to  Direct-to-Home  service  or  Local  Delivery 
service  (that  is.  cable  TV operations)  it  intends  to  drop 
specific  stipulations in the 1997 Bill with regard to  how  many 
such services should be permitted and in the case of the  latter, 
over what area. In the process it also proposes to do away with a 
sub-section   which   provided  for  licences   for   terrestrial 
broadcasting  to  be given to institutions  providing  education, 
community  service, environment protection or  health  awareness. 
The  law  ministry  seems to have  recommended  that  the  entire 
section  pertaining  to  grant  of  licence  for  local  delivery 
services should be dropped. 

The  draft  is so vague that everybody should  be  happy:  Rupert 
Murdoch,  Subhash  Chandra,  the big newspaper  houses,  the  DTH 
aspirants,  foreign news channels and cable operators about  whom 
very  little has been said. The consumer, however, has  not  been 
adequately  reassured on the question of how complaints he  might 
have about what comes into his home will be dealt with. And going 
by   this   draft,  non-  government  organisations   and   rural 
communities have no way of knowing whether the rules will  bother 
to provide broadcasting space for them. 

SEVANTI NINAN

E-mail the writer at sevantininan@vsnl.com 
