
Quest for identity


The  ninth  national  conference  on  women's  studies  held   in 
Hyderabad  earlier  this  month focussed on  the  tribal  woman's 
struggle for recognition. KALPANA SHARMA highlights the myths and 
realities that surround tribal society.

WOMEN'S studies has now become so mainstream and established that 
sometimes  it  produces  a yawn. Can a  meeting  of  the  women's 
studies association yield anything new? Hyderabad, the venue  for 
the ninth National Conference on Women's Studies held early  this 
month,  proved that as long as women's studies keeps its  dynamic 
link  with the contemporary women's movement, it will  remain  an 
area of inquiry which is alive and relevant. 

In some ways, the very location helped to give the discussions  a 
special  meaning  as the women's movement in Andhra  Pradesh  has 
always been intensely political. It has been known for its active 
and  questioning attitude towards accepted paradigms even  within 
the  women's movement. It has produced some outstanding works  of 
scholarship. The opening of the conference saw a dramatisation of 
one  of these works, "We were making history", the story  of  the 
women  in the Telangana armed struggle. These stories would  have 
been  lost  to history if some women had not made the  effort  to 
record them and reproduce them. The dramatisation was a  reminder 
that  the  gender  dimension  can  never  be  overlooked  in  any 
struggle.

The  women  who  reasserted  this  reality  were  those   closely 
associated with contemporary struggles for self-determination  in 
tribal areas as far apart as Arunachal Pradesh and Jharkhand. The 
exact  nature and content of these struggles might vary  but  the 
fate  of all so-called "tribal" people in this country is  linked 
by the uniform and uninformed attitude of the state towards them. 

Jarjum  Ite, general secretary of the Arunachal  Women's  Welfare 
Society,  brought this out by recounting the experience of  women 
in her state. "There is a myth", she said, "that tribal societies 
are  very egalitarian because we (tribal women) are  visible  and 
mobile." But the reality was otherwise. Women in her state cannot 
inherit ancestral property, for instance. There is child marriage 
and  polygamy which women are opposing. And although some  states 
in the north-east have a high level of literacy, in Arunachal the 
literacy rate amongst women is only 29 per cent and the sex ratio 
is 861 women to 1000 men. 

As  a result, even if the government creates programmes  to  help 
women,  such  as  offering them credit, women  cannot  access  it 
because  they do not possess immovable property.  Similarly,  the 
government's attempt to "help" tribals by upgrading technology by 
introducing   shuttle  looms,  for  instance,  to   replace   the 
traditional  pit  looms,  has forced women  to  give  up  weaving 
altogether  as  they  were  not  comfortable  with  the   change.  
Furthermore,  the  education system does not give any  space  for 
women to pass on their traditional skills to their children. As a 
result, many crafts are dying out.

Other  policies,  such  as promoting IMFL  (Indian  Made  Foreign 
Liquor)  in places like Arunachal have "eaten into the  resources 
of  the family because men are hooked to it and women are  forced 
to  take  on more responsibility", she said.  Traditionally,  the 
local rice-based liquor was brewed by women.

There is an assumption, she said, that the demand for more rights 
necessarily means preserving all cultural norms. The RSS and  the 
Vishwa  Hindu  Parishad, for instance, have been  campaigning  in 
Arunachal Pradesh for preservation of tribal culture because they 
see this as a way to prevent people from turning to Christianity. 
But  all  traditional norms do not benefit women.  For  instance, 
apart  from being denied inheritance rights, women  in  Arunachal 
also want an end to practices like child marriage. 

The  tribal  women participating in the Jharkhand  movement  have 
experiences  not  dissimilar to those of  their  counterparts  in 
Arunachal  Pradesh. The fiery young journalist and activist  from 
Ranchi, Vasavi, made this very clear when she expressed her anger 
that  no women could be seen in the leadership of  the  Jharkhand 
movement despite their active participation. Vasavi reminded  the 
audience  that  she was speaking on the centenary  of  the  Birsa 
Munda  uprising in Bihar when 300 tribals were killed for  daring 
to  fight  against  the  British.  "We  are  still  fighting  for 
recognition and also for the liberation of women", she said. 

But  the  liberation of women in tribal societies has  failed  to 
find  any  support  from men. For  instance,  the  Supreme  Court 
judgment  which  granted tribal women the right  to  inheritance, 
otherwise  denied to them under customary law, was  greeted  with 
hostility by the male leadership of the movement who saw it as  a 
plot by non-tribals and "westernised feminists" to attack  tribal 
customary  rights.  "None of the men is prepared to  discuss  the 
issue of inheritance rights," she said. 

Vasavi pointed out that in traditional tribal societies, there is 
no  concept  of  ownership or property.  But  today,  because  of 
widespread  displacement of people to make way for projects  like 
the Koel Karo hydel project, or the Netrahat firing range, tribal 
people are acquiring land "pattas". Yet, when women have demanded 
that  the wife's name should appear alongside the husband's  name 
on the "patta", the men have refused. 

Vasavi's and Jarjum's interventions illustrate the new dimensions 
of  the question that need to be addressed. This is the  question 
of identities. What is women's primary identity, as women, or  as 
members  of a social group? The question becomes  important  when 
tribal  groups, or dalits, fight for rights that relate to  their 
specific  status in society. Thus women in these groups  carry  a 
double  burden, of being twice oppressed. But by asserting  their 
separate  identity  as women, they risk being  accused  of  being  
divisive. So the decision to speak out on women's rights, even as 
they  participate in larger political struggles, is not  an  easy 
one.

Susie Tharu from the group Anveshi, for instance, questioned  the 
very  validity  of  terms  like "tribe" which  she  said  was  an 
invention for administrative purposes. "Just as mainstream  India 
has   been   characterised  as  advanced,   tribal   society   is 
characterised  as  primitive," she said. But she  said  the  very 
notion  of being called "primitive" was actually  a  contemporary 
and modern notion and comes about as part of being reorganised in 
a  nation state. Many of these concepts were  vigorously  debated 
outside the formal meetings.

The  identity  issue  is  a  tricky  one.  It  could  deepen  the 
understanding  and  articulation  of  the  women's  movement   by 
bringing in the many layers within which women have to survive in 
Indian society. But it could also divide the movement if it works 
on  the assumption that only those born into a social  group  can 
understand,  and  therefore  articulate  questions  relating   to 
women's  rights  in that particular group and that there  are  no 
"non-negotiable" rights that apply to all women, irrespective  of 
class, caste or community. 

Although this was just one of several important issues  discussed 
at  the women's studies conference, it is bound to be one of  the 
key areas of inquiry in women's studies in the coming years. 
