
A witness to his times


Fifty years ago, T. S. Satyan began his career with a box  camera 
and over the years rose to become a world-class photographer.  V. 
R.  DEVIKA  writes on this photojournalist whose  works  will  be 
featured at an exhibition called "People" at the Vinyasa  Gallery 
in Chennai from February 3 to 10. 

VETERAN  photojournalist  T. S. Satyan is sitting in  the  sunlit 
drawing  room  of  his  pretty home in  Mysore.  Around  him  are 
beautiful  mounted photographs of people. He is sending  them  to 
Chennai  where his Retrospective is scheduled for February. As  I 
enter   his  home,  the  sight  of  the  76-year-old  legend   of 
photography engrosses me. "How nice," I comment in  appreciation. 
"So much hard work has gone behind it all."

"Yes,  it  all began more than 50 years ago, when I was  in  high 
school  in  Mysore.  When I bought a Kodak box  Brownie  for  six 
rupees from my classmate Y. Kailasam. The photography bug  caught 
me then and continues to this day," he reminisces.

While in the final year of high school, young Satyan won a  prize 
in  the  Illustrated Weekly snapshots competition.  It  showed  a 
child  playing  with  an abacus. "I went to college  and  so  did 
Kailasam.  Our  passion for photography increased.  Our  teachers 
encouraged  us. The college had a photo section with a dark  room 
attached  where  we  worked.  My  supportive  professor,  W.   G. 
Eagleton, even loaned me Rs. 300 to buy a reflex camera."  Satyan 
remembers his classmates and contemporaries - Sharada Prasad,  R. 
K.   Laxman,  Veena  Doraiswamy  Iyengar  and  economist  P.   R. 
Brahmananda among others.

Satyan's  outlet for his pictures then was the  only  illustrated 
magazine  of  those days - the Illustrated Weekly of  India.  Its 
editors were fond of pictures - Stanley Jepson, Micheal Brown and 
C.  R.  Mandy. Entirely self-taught, Satyan's early  job  was  to 
document  meticulously the people and places in his own  city  of 
Mysore and its neighbourhood.

After graduating from Mysore University in 1944, Satyan worked as 
a  teacher  for  some  time, a radio news  reader  in  the  local 
Akashvani,  and as organising secretary with the Adult  Education 
Council.  "My first job was as an engine inspector  at  Hindustan 
Aeronautics  in  Bangalore. I asked them to sack me  because  one 
month's  additional  salary would get me three months  supply  of 
film," he laughs.

Satyan  got  his  big break in 1948.  The  management  of  Deccan 
Herald, with Pothan Joseph as editor called him. After two  years 
he moved to Bombay to work as feature writer on the staff of  the 
Weekly  he  was so fond of. "I found Bombay  crowded,  noisy  and 
stifling  compared  to  my placid Mysore.  It  restricted  me.  I 
returned to Mysore, got married and began to freelance for Indian  
and international publications."

"That  was  the time when the international media was  showing  a 
great  interest in our large and complex country. That  was  also 
the  time  when I got more of my pictures published  abroad,"  he 
says  and goes on to remember his postmaster friend,  Vishwanath. 
"He  used to dab the four corners of my packets  with  vermillion 
and  turmeric to invoke God's blessings for my success.  Friendly 
fellow.  To  him  my talent as a  photographer  was  incidental!" 
Satyan burst into laughter.

Satyan  recalls  his visit to Sravanabelagola to  photograph  the 
anointing  ceremony  of Bahubali that takes place once  every  12 
years.  That was in the Fifties. "The back of my bakelite  camera 
was broken and I had plastered it with tape. It could hold a roll 
of 12 frames. Atop the sacred hill, I met a familiar person whose 
pictures  I  had  seen.  He  was James  Burke,  one  of  the  top 
photographers from Life magazine. I told him that I was  shooting 
some black and white pictures for an American picture syndicate - 
Black  Star Inc. Looking at my camera, and my limited raw  stock, 
he  must  have thought that I was talking through my hat.  But  I 
knew he was taken in by my unbridled enthusiasm. He asked me  for 
tea in his tent, passed on a few rolls of film and asked me if  I 
had  any  ambitions. Instantly I blurted out: 'Yes,  working  for 
Life.  And  going round the world with my camera.' I  don't  know 
what Burke thought of my spontaneous outburst. My black and white 
pictures  were  published  in America  earlier  than  his  colour 
pictures.  I  thought he would be jealous. Instead he sent  me  a 
congratulatory telegram."

What  followed  a year later was even more gladdening  for  young 
Satyan.  James Burke went on home leave asking him to  cover  the 
transfer of Pondicherry and other French settlements in India for 
Life.  "He  sent me a letter telegram to this effect.  My  father 
could not control his joy and snatched the telegram from my  hand 
and  cycled  round the city showing it to all his  friends!"  But 
disappointment  awaited Satyan. Despite his imaginative  coverage 
of  Pondicherry,  his films did not reach New York on  time  and, 
when they did, the story had lost its topicality. "To my ill luck 
there  was a faux pas in shipment. My films had got stuck at  the 
Shannon airport in Ireland," rues Satyan.

"What if the films had reached you on time? How much space  would 
you  have spared?" Burke asked his picture editor.  "Two  pages!" 
came the answer.

A  delighted  Burke asked Satyan to team up with him to  cover  a 
snap  election in Andhra Pradesh when the Congress  was  fighting 
the Communists. Satyan met with success. Life published  Satyan's 
five pictures as against Burke's three.

Satyan  made  Delhi his home for 32 years from 1957  and  covered 
many significant events and personalities.

Satyan also worked for many journals apart from LIFE and  carried  
out prestigious assignments for the United Nations and its allied 
agencies,  notably UNICEF. UNICEF was so taken by the quality  of 
Satyan's  pictures  of  children  that  made  him   photographer-
consultant.  On  his  visit to  India,  the  Director-General  of 
UNICEF,  Henri  Labourise,  asked Satyan to travel  with  him  to 
Eastern  India.  Satyan photographed the ravages  resulting  from 
floods  and famine and their effect on children and  old  people. 
When he presented his album to Labourise, he complimented  Satyan 
for his sensitive pictures. "I don't have to write a long  report 
when  I seek more aid for India. Your pictures say better what  I 
want to express," he said.

During  the International Year of the Child in 1979,  the  UNICEF 
did  Satyan  a  signal  honour.  It  sponsored,  worldwide,   his 
exhibition   on  India's  children  called  Little  People.   The 
inaugural  show  was  held in the public  lobby  of  the  General 
Assembly at the United Nations in New York. During the month-long 
exhibition,  several  thousands viewed Satyan's  work  which  was 
listed in that year's photographic rankings by LIFE as one of the 
most  important events. Satyan's professional life had come  full 
circle.  And  honours came to him, too. The Government  of  India 
conferred  on  him  the  Padma  Shri.  The  Karnataka  Government 
bestowed the Rajyotsava Award.

I asked him to narrate some incidents in his professional  career 
relating  to important assignments and challenges.  Reluctant  to 
talk about himself too much, Satyan made an exception. He told me 
the  story of how he carried out a photo assignment for  LIFE  on 
Acharya  Vinoba Bhave's padayatra. "We won't be able to use  your 
story  unless there is key shot of Bhave marching in moon  light. 
We  are  looking  for a powerful mood  shot,"  said  the  picture 
editor.  There was moonlight all right but Satyan had to  find  a 
shallow  patch of water on the route of Vinoba so that  he  could 
take  a silhouette shot. "I conspired with the villager  who  led 
the  group holding a lantern in hand. He found a patch  of  water 
during our jeep ride the previous evening of the march. Villagers 
have  no  sense  of distance. I took my  position  and  shot  the 
picture  when  Vinoba stepped on the small stone  slabs  kept  on 
water  to enable people to cross safely. The picture made a  near 
double spread in the magazine, but Bhave had to walk an extra two 
kilometres   unknowingly  for  me."  Satyan  mentioned  that   he 
apologised to the Acharya when they met a few years later.

Introducing  Satyan's  Retrospective, now touring India  (it  has 
already been viewed by people in Mysore, Bangalore, Udupi, Mumbai 
and  New  Delhi), H. Y. Sharada Prasad,  eminent  journalist  and 
former  Information Adviser to the Prime Minister, says: "I  have 
marvelled  at  the speed at which his eye and mind  size  up  the 
pictorial   possibilities  of  a  situation.   A   characteristic 
spontaneity,  openness and zest mark his work. His  eye  observes 
more  than  his camera does. His mind moves like  lightning.  The 
result  is  that Satyan's art conceals itself and gives  one  the 
impression  of  effortlessness.  He  communicates  instantly.  He 
emerges as a discoverer, not a mere recorderer."

Talking about his oeuvre, Satyan says: "My subjects are  ordinary 
people with whom I am completely at ease. Intimate without  being 
intrusive, I have always tried to capture the decisive moments in 
their  lives.  My  subjects do not hit the  headlines,  but  they 
matter.   For   me,   photography  is  a   powerful   medium   of 
communication.  My pictures, therefore, are slices of human  life 
attempting to be compassionate, gentle and personal. Their aim is 
to let the viewer see himself."

Satyan is very fond of quoting Paul Strand: "Your photography  is 
a record of your living, for anyone who really sees. You may  see 
and be affected by other people's ways, you may use them to  find 
your own." 
