
The genius of Pablo Neruda


IF  Pablo Neruda's recent fame in this country has  been  largely 
achieved on the basis of his love poems, which in turn received a 
fillip from the movies that romanticised his life, "II  Postino", 
it  is time we did better with one of the greatest poets  of  our 
time.  What  better  way  to begin  this  process  than  to  draw 
attention  to perhaps his greatest poem, the long narrative  epic 
"The Heights of Macchu Picchu" (Farrar, Straus and Giroux).

Macchu  Picchu  is one of the fabled lost cities  of  the  Incas, 
perched   on  two  peaks  (Macchu  Picchu  and   Huayna   Picchu) 
overlooking  the Urubamba river. Its ruins were  discovered  only 
recently  (i.e.  in around 1910) and were  remarkably  preserved. 
Except for some erosion due to wind and water, the city was in an 
excellent  state  of  repair -  watercourses,  temples,  squares, 
houses, staircases, gates and warehouses. Nobody knows why Macchu 
Picchu's  inhabitants disappeared but that has only added to  its 
mystery  and  allure,  as  it  stands  remote  and  magnificently 
enshrouded in swirling mist far above the Amazon in the  Peruvian 
Andes.

"The Heights Of Macchu Picchu" is a poem in 12 sections in  which 
the poet makes "a kind of pilgrimage through human life in search 
of meaningful truth". In his introduction to this edition, Robert 
Pring-Mill  writes:  "When Neruda does reach Macchu  Picchu,  its 
heights turn out to be the place from which all else makes sense, 
including his own continent".

The first five poems have the poet setting scene, translating the 
world   and  life  itself  into  uniquely  brilliant   metaphors, 
metaphors  that  recur in almost all his work. Take  for  example 
this verse that opens Section II in which the poet contrasts  man 
with nature - nature is generous, self perpetuating while man  is 
driven to impoverish himself:

Flower to flower delivers up its seed
and rock maintains its blossom 
broadcast
in a bruised garment of diamond and 
sand
yet man crumples the petal of the light 
he skims 
from the predetermined sources of the 
sea
and drills the pulsing metal in his 
hands
soon, caught between clothes and 
smoke, on the sunken floor,
the soul's reduced to a shuffled pack,
quartz and insomnia, tears in the sea,
like pools of cold - yet this is not 
enough: 

he kills, confesses it on paper with 
contempt,
muffles it in the rug of habit, shreds it
in a hostile apparel of wire.

For me the poem really picks up when it gets to Section IV  where 
he poet actually gets to Macchu Picchu:

Then up the ladder of the earth I 
climbed
Through the barbed jungle's thickets
Until I reached you Macchu Picchu.

Tall city of stepped stone,
home at long last of whatever earth
had never hidden in her sleeping 
clothes, 
in you two lineages that had run 
parallel,
met where the cradle both of man and 
light
rocked in a wind of thorns.

Mother of stone and sperm of condors.

High reef of the human dawn.

The  poet finds himself identifying with the vanished  people  of 
this  great  city on the heights and it helps him  with  his  own 
search  for meanings, his meditations on transformative power  of 
life and the absolute quality of death. By the time we get to the 
twelfth  poem,  we  see  Neruda  identifying  with  all  men  and 
attempting to show "men to themselves in such a way that they can 
feel the identity behind their separate lives."

The  translation  I  first  read 20 years  ago,  and  that  I  am 
reviewing  now  is  by the poet Nathaniel  Tarn,  and  was  first 
published in 1966. It is a tribute to its excellence that it  has 
remained  continuously  in  print and that  its  24  reprint  was 
published in 1999. The great Chilean poet has been served well. 

DAVID DAVIDAR
