
Escape to freedom?


The  sudden  arrival  of Ugyen Trinley Dorje, 17th  head  of  the 
Karmapa branch of the Kagyu order, in India signals the  shifting 
alliances  and  mercurial  changes of fortune  that  have  shaped 
Tibet's course. Is it possible that the teenaged leader is caught 
in  a  drama the implications of which he may not  have  grasped, 
asks RANJIT HOSKOTE.

HALF  a century after China's annexation of Tibet and the  forced 
exodus  of thousands of Tibetans from their homeland,  the  world 
continues to view the high plateau through the distorting lens of 
stereotype.  To  the Euro-American imagination,  Tibet  has  long 
epitomised  the  exotic  East: it  appears,  in  fiction,  travel 
writing  and occult lore, as a fountainhead of  mystical  wisdom. 
Tibetan Buddhism has attracted a large if motley following in the 
West since the Fifties and Sixties , first under the guruship  of 
Beatniks like Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac, and later  through 
the  Flower Children's heady discovery of Tantric  consciousness-
expansion techniques.

Tibet  has  also occupied a special niche in  India's  collective 
imagination.  Its  elaborate  ritual dramaturgy  appeals  to  our 
iconographic sensibilities; at the same time, our appreciation of 
that  splendour is darkened by an awareness of loss. Since  1959, 
when the Dalai Lama escaped from Chinese-held Lhasa to an  Indian 
refuge,  Tibetan  Buddhism  has had to flower  in  the  uncertain 
circumstances of exile. While the increasing global concern  with 
the Tibetan predicament has generated serious activist efforts to 
secure freedom for the Land of the Snows, it has also spun off  a 
popular,  Hollywood-meets-the Orient image of Tibet in which  the 
sense  of tragedy is almost overshadowed by a nostalgia  for  the 
picturesque.

The   same  uneasy  oscillation  between  the  tragic   and   the 
picturesque has informed the media response to the recent  escape 
of  Ugyen Trinley Dorje, 17th head of the Karmapa branch  of  the 
Kagyu  order  (the  oldest of Tibetan  Buddhisms  four  principal 
monastic orders). 

Even  as the Indian and Chinese Governments discuss the  14-year-
old incarnate abbot's future, the searchlight of public curiosity 
has  been  turned  once  again  on  the  mysteries  of  what   is 
inaccurately  described as lamaism. Much wit has  been  expended, 
for  example, on explaining the semiotics of the "red",  "black", 
"white"  and  "yellow ceremonial hats" by which  members  of  the 
Tibetan  monastic  orders  are  differentiated.  After  all,  the 
official  Chinese  explanation is that the lama is  in  India  to 
collect the "black hat" which signifies his authority.

In  fact,  the boy abbot's sudden arrival in India  offers  us  a 
chance  to take a closer look at the disquietudes masked  by  the 
many  successes  of Tibetan Buddhism in exile. The drama  of  his  
escape  which  mirrors the Dalai Lamas own 1959 ride  to  freedom 
recalls  to mind the shifting alliances and mercurial changes  of 
fortune that have shaped, and continue to shape, Tibet's  course. 
For  the  Tibetan  system has never  been  the  static,  timeless 
construct of Orientalist romance; rather, it has evolved  through 
the  complex interaction of human agents. And the hats that  have 
attracted  so much attention are the most vivid symbols  of  this 
historical backdrop. If post-Plantagenet England had its "Wars of 
the  Roses", first-millennium Tibet had its periodic Wars of  the 
Hats.  In  Tibet,  the  marriage of  religion  and  politics  has 
manifested  itself  as  a conflict for  primacy  among  the  four 
orders,   which  have  successively  dominated   the   highland's 
collective life since the 11th Century.

In  chronological  order of emergence, the major orders  are  the 
Kagyupa,  the Nyingmapa, the Sakyapa and the Gelugpa  (the  Dalai 
Lama  belongs to the last and youngest of these, the  Gelugpa  or 
"Yellow Hats", who have held undisputed sway over Tibet since the 
mid-17th  Century). All four orders affirm the synthesis  of  the 
Hinayana,  Mahayana and Vajrayana traditions which gives  Tibetan 
Buddhism  its  unique fusion of  monastic  discipline,  spiritual 
vibrancy  and  esoteric  ceremonial.  They  are  not   schismatic 
churches,  but  teaching lineages distinguished  by  the  varying 
emphasis  they  place  on some aspect  of  Buddhist  thought  and 
practice.

Of  particular  interest in the present context is the  Kagyu  or 
whispered tradition, whose spiritual ancestry includes the  poet-
sage Milarepa, the teacher Marpa and the legendary Indian  siddha 
Naropa.  The much-publicised Karmapa represents an  off-shoot  of 
the Kagyu and is credited with having devised the tulku system of 
incarnate  succession,  in which the incarnations  of  lamas  are 
recognised as children and trained to continue along the path  of 
enlightenment; this principle of the continuity of  consciousness 
from one life to the next was later taken up by the rival Gelugpa 
and is enshrined in their premier institution, that of the  Dalai 
Lama.

Each  order's  distinctive  identity  has  developed  around  its 
favoured  texts and practices, the lay support it  has  commanded 
and  the  monasteries  where  it has  been  based  (most  of  the 
important Tibetan monasteries, including the Gelugpa  strongholds 
of Ganden, Sera and Drepung, have now been relocated in  Himachal 
Pradesh and Karnataka). The orders have functioned as  monastery-
estates,  and their abbots have not been immune to the fruits  of 
power. As a result, the balance of influence in Tibet has shifted 
from  one order to another, and military ascendancy  has  shifted 
correspondingly  among their Mongol, Chinese and  native  Tibetan 
supporters.  When the internecine warfare between  the  declining 
Kagyu-Karmapa and the rising Gelugpa came to a head in 1641,  for 
instance,  the latter turned to the Mongol Buddhist warlords  for 
help. Indeed, it was the Mongols who established the fifth  Dalai 
Lama as Tibet's paramount temporal ruler.

Since  the Tibetan system has undergone both gradual  change  and  
abrupt  mutation  before, the possibility of its doing  so  again 
cannot  be  dismissed, especially since the  Tibetan  people  are 
confronted  by three critical problems today. The first of  these 
is the vexed relationship between monastic Buddhism and the much-
reviled,  but widespread, pre-Buddhist Bon shamanism.  The  Dalai 
Lama's  1963 democratic reforms ensured that Bon  representatives 
were  elected  to  the  Tibetan  parliament-in-exile,  but  their 
practices continue to be derided by more conservative  Buddhists. 
The persistence of folk religion can also generate problems  like 
the  one revealed during an acrimonious 1996  controversy,  after 
the Dalai Lama tried to ban the cultic worship of a figure called 
Dorje  Shugden  and  was  accused,  by  Shugden  worshippers,  of 
infringing upon their freedom of worship.

The  second problem is the likelihood of a dilution of  spiritual 
content, following the over-popularisation of Tibetan Buddhism in 
the  West.  The  image  of Tibetan  Buddhism  has  been  somewhat 
tarnished  by  the  tulku boom, with  an  ever-rising  number  of 
incarnate  lamas  being  reported  among  European  and  American 
converts;  a contemporary Tibetan saying has it that,  soon,  the 
cooks  of  every  monastery  will  be  reincarnating  themselves. 
Moreover,  considerable  negative  publicity  has  attended   the 
discovery  that  some  Tibetan teachers  have  succumbed  to  the 
temptations  of a Westernised lifestyle; some disenchantment  has 
also  set  in  on  prolonged exposure to  what  might  be  called 
celebrity  Buddhism, as when Richard Geres' personality seems  to 
eclipse the cause itself.

The  third and potentially most worrying problem is  the  growing 
unrest  among  the children of the diaspora. To many  members  of 
this  younger  generation of refugees, born  outside  Tibet,  the 
homeland  must  be  restored  by  any  means,  including  violent 
struggle.  From this militant viewpoint, the Dalai Lama's  policy 
of  non-violent  activism is perceived as  evidence  of  suicidal 
pacifism,  if  not of acquiescence in Chinese  aggression.  Given 
this groundswell of dissident feeling, it is not impossible  that 
a  providential figure like the Karmapa lama may become a  symbol 
of  suffering and resistance around whom the  younger  generation 
could rally. Any such development could have fateful consequences 
for the delicate balance of contending forces, both religious and 
political, that the Dalai Lama has worked hard to maintain within 
the  Tibetan  diaspora  for  40 years.  And  since  it  has  been 
indicated that His Holiness may not incarnate himself again,  the 
future direction of the Tibetan freedom struggle may be difficult 
to  predict.  Cautious diplomats on both sides of  the  Himalayan 
range  have suggested that the Karmapa lama is visiting India  to 
look   for  musical  instruments  required  for  his   ceremonial 
practice;  but  the teenage hierarch may himself be  destined  to 
serve  as an instrument in a drama whose implications he and  his 
fellow monks may not have fully grasped. 
